

BJORKEN and DRELL Relativistic Quantum Fields 

BJORKEN and DRELL Relativistic Quantum Mechanics 

CHODOROW and SUSSKIND Fundamentals of Microwave Electronics 

CLARK Applied X-rays 

COLLIN Field Theory of Guided Waves 

EVANS The Atomic Nucleus 

FEYNMAN and HI BBS Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals 

GINZTON Microwave Measurements 

HALL Introduction to Electron Microscopy 

HARDY and PERRIN The Principles of Optics 

HARNWELL Electricity and Electromagnetism 

HARNWELL and LIVINGOOD Experimental Atomic Physics 

HENLEY and THIRRING Elementary Quantum Field Theory 

HOUSTON Principles of Mathematical Physics 

JAMMER The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics 

KENNARD Kinetic Theory of Gases 

LEIGHTON Principles of Modern Physics 

LINDSAY Mechanical Radiation 

LIVINGSTON and BLEWETT Particle Accelerators 

MIDDLETON An Introduction to Statistical Communication Theory 

MORSE Vibration and Sound 

MORSE and FESHBACH Methods of Theoretical Physics 

MORSE and INGARD Theoretical Acoustics 

MUSKAT Physical Principles of Oil Production 

NEWTON Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles 

PRESENT Kinetic Theory of Gases 

READ Dislocations in Crystals 

RICHTMYER, KENNARD, and LAURITSEN Introduction to Modern Physics 

SCHIFF Quantum Mechanics 

SCHWARTZ Introduction to Special Relativity 

SEITZ The Modern Theory of Solids 

SLATER Introduction to Chemical Physics 

SLATER Quantum Theory of Atomic Structure, Vol. I 

SLATER Quantum Theory of Atomic Structure, Vol. II 

SLATER Quantum Theory of Matter 

SLATER Electronic Structure of Molecules: Quantum Theory of Molecules and Solids, Vol. 1 

SLATER Symmetry and Energy Bands in Crystals: Quantum Theory of Molecules and 

Solids, Vol. 2 
SLATER Insulators, Semiconductors, and Metals: Quantum Theory of Molecules and 

Solids, Vol. 3 
SLATER and FRANK Introduction to Theoretical Physics 
SLATER and FRANK Mechanics 
SMYTH E Static and Dynamic Electricity 
STRATTON Electromagnetic Theory 
TINKHAM Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics 
TOWNES and SCHAWLOW Microwave Spectroscopy 
WANG Solid-state Electronics 
WHITE Introduction to Atomic Spectra 

The late F. K. Richtmyer was Consulting Editor of the series from its inception in 1929 to his 
death in 1939. Lee A. Du Bridge was Consulting Editor from 1939 to 1946; and G. P. Harnwell 
from 1947 to 1954. 



QUANTUM 
MECHANICS 



THIRD EDITION 



LEONARD I. SCHIFF 

Professor of Physics 
Stanford University 



INTERNATIONAL STUDENT EDITION 



McGRAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY 

New York St. Louis San Francisco 
London Mexico Panama Sydney Toronto 
KOGAKUSHA COMPANY, LTD. 
Tokyo 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 

INTERNATIONAL STUDENT EDITION 

Exclusive rights by Kogakusha Co., Ltd., for 
manufacture and export from Japan. This 
book cannot be re-exported from the country to 
which it is consigned by Kogakusha Co., Ltd., 
or by McGraw-Hill Book Company 
or any of its subsidiaries. 
v 

Copyright © 1955, 1968 by McGraw-Hill, Inc. 

All Rights Reserved. Copyright 1949 by 

McGraw-Hill, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, 

stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, 

in any form or by any means, electronic, 

mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 

otherwise, without the prior written permission 

of the publisher. 

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 68-25665 



TOSIIO PRINTING CO., LTD., TOKYO, JAPAN 



TO FRANCES 



PREFACE 



This volume has a threefold purpose; to explain the physical concepts of 
quantum mechanics, to describe the mathematical formalism, and to 
present illustrative examples of both the ideas and the methods. The 
book is intended to serve as a text at the graduate level and also as a 
reference book. It is assumed that the reader is reasonably familiar with 
classical mechanics, electromagnetic theory, atomic structure, and dif- 
ferential equations; prior acquaintance with matrices or group theory is 
not necessary. In addition, he should have had some contact with com- 
plex variables (for Chap. 9) and the special theory of relativity (for 
Chap. 13). 

The author believes that the analytical methods employed in the 
book will satisfy most theoretical physicists even though no attempt is 
made to achieve mathematical rigor. For example, there is little or no 
discussion of the justification for the interchange of sum, derivative, and 
integral operations or for the use of the 5 function. On the other hand, 
the physical reasons for the nature of the results obtained are investigated 
wherever possible. 

Problems are given at the end of each chapter. They are often used 
to illustrate or amplify points discussed in the text. Original theoretical 
papers are referred to throughout the book; the list is representative 
rather than exhaustive. Experimental results are, for the most part, 
quoted without reference, since the large amount of documentation 
required for an adequate survey seems out of place in a book on theoretical 
physics. Several other books and review articles on quantum mechanics 
and related subjects are referred to for more detailed discussions of 
particular topics. 

The scope of this volume is best outlined if the book is divided into 

ix 



x PREFACE 

three parts. The first three chapters constitute an introduction to 
quantum mechanics, m which the physical concepts are discussed and the 
Schrodinger wave formalism is established. The next nine chapters 
present exact solutions of the wave equation for both bound-state and 
collision problems, the Heisenberg matrix formalism and transformation 
theory, symmetry, approximation methods, the scattering matrix, particle 
identity, radiation theory, and some applications to atomic systems. 
Since Chaps. 5 to 12 include most of the material given in a first-year 
graduate course, it seems desirable to include a semiclassical treatment of 
electromagnetic radiation (Chap. 11) even though some of the results are 
obtained again in Chap. 14. The last two chapters are an introduction to 
relativistic particle theory and to quantized fields. 

The first edition of this book was completed 20 years ago, and 
relatively few changes were made in the second edition. Thus the present 
revision is of necessity extensive; at the same time it is intended to retain 
the comprehensiveness of the original volume without a substantial 
increase in length. The principal additions are a section on complex 
potentials and the reciprocity and optical theorems (Sec. 20); a much 
fuller account of matrices and transformation theory (Chap. 6); a new 
chapter that discusses geometrical and dynamical symmetries and 
includes a fairly detailed account of angular momentum (Chap. 7); a 
considerably expanded treatment of approximation methods for bound- 
state and collision problems, including the scattering matrix and its 
applications, analytic properties, and dispersion relations (Chaps. 8 and 9) ; 
and a new section on the density operator and matrix (Sec. 42). The 
principal topics dropped from the second edition are the variational treat- 
ment of scattering, the theory of the Cerenkov effect, and the quantiza- 
tion of the Dirac equation; also, the last two sections of the second edition 
are somewhat condensed and combined into one (Sec. 57) in the present 
volume. Some changes in notation have been made to conform to cur- 
rent usage, and a table of the numerical values of some physical quantities 
has been added inside the back cover. 

The author wishes again to record his indebtedness to the late 
Prof. J. R. Oppenheimer and to Prof. Robert Serber in connection with 
the preparation of the first edition of this book. He is also grateful to 
several of those who have studied and taught from the earlier revision for 
their many helpful suggestions. In particular, Prof. E. H. Wichmann 
prepared a thorough review of the second edition that contributed sub- 
stantially to the present volume. The author also thanks the many 
students who studied from the various drafts of the third edition for their 
comments, and especially Prof. J. D. Walecka for his constructive criti- 
cism of particular sections. 

Leonard I. Schiff 



CONTENTS 



Preface ix 



Chapter 1 The Physical Basis of Quantum Mechanics 1 

1 Experimental Background 2 
Inadequacy of classical physics. Summary of principal experiments 

and inferences, 

2 The Old Quantum Theory 4 
Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rules. Practical difficulties. Con- 
ceptual difficulties. Quantum- mechanical viewpoint. 

3 Uncertainty and Complementarity 7 
Uncertainty principle. Complementarity principle. Limitations 

on experiment. 

4 Discussion of Measurement 9 
Localization experiment. Momentum determination experiment. 
Analysis of diffraction experiment. Discussion of diffraction 
experiment. 

5 Wave Packets in Space and Time 14 
Space packets. Time packets. Wave formalism. 

Chapter 2 The Schrodinger Wave Equation 19 

6 Development of the Wave Equation 20 
Traveling harmonic waves. Need for a wave equation. The one- 



*li CONTENTS 

dimensional wave equation. Extension to three dimensions. 
Inclusion of forces. 

7 Interpretation of the Wave Function 24 

Statistical interpretation. Normalization of ^. Probability current 
density. Expectation value. Ehrenfest's theorem. 

8 Energy Eigenfunctions 30 
Separation of the wave equation. Significance of the separation 
constant E. Boundary conditions at great distances. Continuity 
conditions. Boundary conditions for infinite potential energy. 
Energy eigenvalues in one dimension. Discrete energy levels. 
Continuous energy eigenvalues. Discrete and continuous eigen- 
values in three dimensions. 

9 One-dimensional Square Well Potential 37 
Perfectly rigid walls. Finite potential step. Ent-gy levels. 
Parity. A simplified solution. 

Chapter 3 Eigenfunctions and Eigenvalues 45 

10 Interpretative Postulates and Energy Eigenfunctions 46 
Dynamical variables as operators. Expansion in eigenfunctions. 
The total-energy operator. Normalization in a box. Orthonor- 
mality of energy eigenfunctions. Reality of the energy eigenvalues. 
Expansion in energy eigenfunctions. The closure property. Proba- 
bility function and expectation value. General solution of the 
Schrodinger equation. 

11 Momentum Eigenfunctions 53 
Form of the eigenfunctions. Box normalization. The Dirae &amp; func- 
tion. A representation of the 8 function. Normalization in terms 

of the &amp; function. Some properties of the 5 function. Closure. 
Expansion in momentum eigenfunctions. Probability function and 
expectation value. 

12 Motion of a Free Wave Packet in One Dimension 60 
The minimum uncertainty product. Form of the minimum packet. 
Momentum expansion coefficients. Change with time of a minimum 
packet. Classical limit. 

Chapter 4 Discrete Eigenvalues: Bound States 66 

13 Linear Harmonic Oscillator 66 
Asymptotic behavior. Energy levels. Zero-point energy. Hermite 
polynomials. Harmonic-oscillator wave functions. Correspondence 
with classical theory. Oscillating wave packet. 

14 Spherically Symmetric Potentials in Three Dimensions 76 
Separation of the wave equation. Legendre polynomials. Spherical 
harmonics. Parity. Angular momentum. 

15 Three-dimensional Square Well Potential 83 
Zero angular momentum. Interior solutions for arbitrary l. Ex- 
terior solutions for arbitrary I. Energy levels. 



CONTENTS * 111 

16 The Hydrogen Atom 88 
Reduced mass. Asymptotic behavior. Knergy levels. Laguerre 
polynomials. Hydrogen-atom wave functions. Degeneracy. Sepa- 
ration in parabolic coordinates. Energy levels. Wave functions. 

Chapter 5 Continuous Eigenvalues: Collision Theory 100 

17 One-dimensional Square Potential Barrier 101 
Asymptotic behavior. Normalization. Scattering coefficients. 
Scattering of a wave packet. 

18 Collisions in Three Dimensions 105 
Scattering cross section. Relations between angles in the laboratory 

and center-of-mass systems. Relation between cross sections. 
Dependence on y. Asymptotic behavior. Normalization. 

19 Scattering by Spherically Symmetric Potentials 116 
Asymptotic behavior. Differential cross section. Total elastic cross 
section. Phase shifts. Calculation of Si. Relation between signs of 

&amp;i and V(r). Ramsauer-Townsend effect. Scattering by a per- 
fectly rigid sphere. Scattering by a square well potential. Reso- 
nance scattering. Angular distribution at low energies. 

20 Scattering by Complex Potentials 129 
Conservation of probability. Complex phase shifts. Asymptotic 
relations. Reciprocity theorem. Generalized optical theorem. 
Optical theorem. 

21 Scattering by a Coulomb Field 138 
Parabolic coordinates. Confluent hypergeometric function. Scat- 
tering cross section and normalization. Solution in spherical 
coordinates. Modified coulomb field. Classical limit for a pure 
coulomb field. 

Chapter 6 Matrix Formulation of Quantum Mechanics 148 

22 Matrix Algebra 149 
Matrix addition and multiplication. Null, unit, and constant 
matrices. Trace, determinant, and inverse of a matrix. Hermitian 

and unitary matrices. Transformation and diagonalization of 
matrices. Functions of matrices. Matrices of infinite rank. 

23 Transformation Theory I 55 
Unitary matrix W. Transformation of the hamiltonian with W. 
Transformation of the hamiltonian with U. Transformation of the 
hamiltonian with V. Representations of operators. A useful 
identity. Row and column matrices. Hilbert space. Dirae's bra 

and ket notation. Projection operators. Physical meaning of 
matrix elements. 

24 Equations of Motion 167 
Schrodinger picture. Heisenberg picture. Interaction picture. 
Energy representation. Classical lagrangian and hamiltonian 
equations of motion. Poisson brackets and commutator brackets. 



«l* CONTENTS 

Quantization of a classical system. Motion of a partiele in an elec- 
tromagnetic field. Evaluation of commutator brackets Velocity 
and acceleration of a charged particle. The Lorentz force, Virial 
theorem. 

25 Matrix Theory of the Harmonic Oscillator 180 
Energy representation. Raising and lowering operators. Matrices 

for a, x, and p. Coordinate representation. 

Chapter 7 Symmetry in Quantum Mechanics 187 

26 Space and Time Displacements 188 

Unitary displacement operator. Equation of motion. Symmetry 
and degeneracy. Matrix elements for displaced states. The group 
concept. Time displacement. 

27 Rotation, Angular Momentum, and Unitary Groups 194 
Proper rotation group. Geometrical isomorphism. Infinitesimal 
rotations. Spin of a vector particle. Commutation relations for the 
generators. Choice of a representation. Values of m, f(j), and \ m . 
Angular momentum matrices. Connection with spherical har- 
monics. Spin angular momentum. Covering group. Unitary and 
special unitary groups in two dimensions. The groups U(n) and 
SU(n). Generators of U{n) and SU(n), The SU(S) group. 
Representation in terms of coordinates and momenta. 

28 Combination of Angular Momentum States and Tensor Operators 212 
Eigenvalues of the total angular momentum. Clebsch-Gordan 
coefficients. Recursion relations. Construction procedure. Some 
particular coefficients. Matrix elements for rotated states. Ir- 
reducible tensor operators. Product of tensor operators. Com- 
bination of operator and eigenstate. Wigner-Eckart theorem. 

29 Space Inversion and Time Reversal 224 
Space inversion. Unitary inversion operator. Intrinsic parity. 

I nverted states and operators. Time reversal. Antilinear operators. 
Antiunitary operators. T for a zero spin particle. T for a nonzero 
spin particle. Systems of several particles. Reality of eigen- 
functions. 

30 Dynamical Symmetry 234 
Classical Kepler problem. Hydrogen atom. The 0(4) group. 
Energy levels of hydrogen. Classical isotropic oscillator. Quantum 
isotropic oscillator. 

Chapter 8 Approximation Methods for Bound States 244 

31 Stationary Perturbation Theory 245 
Kondegenerate case. First-order perturbation. Second-order per- 
turbation. Perturbation of an oscillator. Degenerate case. Re- 
moval of degeneracy in second order. Zee man effect without 
electron spin. First-order Stark effect in hydrogen. Perturbed 
energy levels. Occurrence of permanent electric dipole moments. 



CONTENTS ** 

32 The Variation Method 255 
Expectation value of the energy. Application to excited states. 
Ground state of helium. Electron interaction energy. Variation of 

the parameter Z. van der Waals interaction. Perturbation calcu- 
lation. Variation calculation. 

33 Alternative Treatment of the Perturbation Series 263 
Second-order Stark effect in hydrogen. Polarizability of hydrogen. 
Method of Dalgarno and Lewis. Third-order perturbed energy. 
Interaction of a hydrogen atom and a point charge. 

34 The WKB Approximation 268 
Classical limit. Approximate solutions. Asymptotic nature of the 
solutions. Solution near a turning point. Linear turning point. 
Connection at the turning point. Asymptotic connection formulas. 
Energy levels of a potential well. A quantization rule. Special 
boundary conditions. Tunneling through a barrier. 

35 Methods for Time-dependent Problems 279 
Time-dependent perturbation theory. Interaction picture. First- 
order perturbation. Harmonic perturbation. Transition proba- 
bility. Ionization of a hydrogen atom. Density of final states. 
Ionization probability. Second-order perturbation. Adiabatic ap- 
proximation. Choice of phases. Connection with perturbation 
theory. Discontinuous change in //. Sudden approximation. 
Disturbance of an oscillator. 



Chapter 9 Approximation Methods in Collision Theory 298 

36 The Scattering Matrix 298 
Green's functions and propagator. Free-particle Green's functions. 
Integral equation for ^. Integral equation for the propagator. Use 

of the advanced Green's function. Differential equation for the 
Green's functions. Symbolic relations. Application to scattering. 
Unitarity of the S matrix. Symmetry properties of the &lt;S matrix. 

37 Stationary Collision Theory 312 
Transition matrix. Transition probability. Scattering cross sec- 
tion. Green's functions for stationary case. Green's functions as 
inverse operators. Stationary propagator. Free-particle propaga- 
tor. Scattering amplitude. Ingoing waves. S matrix for station- 
ary case. Angular momentum representation. 

38 Approximate Calculations 324 
Born approximation. Validity of the Born approximation. Scat- 
tering from two potentials. Distorted wave Born approximation. 
Partial wave analysis of the DWBA. Approximate expression for 

the phase shifts. Scatterer with internal degrees of freedom. 
Elastic and inelastic cross sections. Electron scattering from 
hydrogen. Production of a cloud chamber track. Second-order 
perturbation theory. Evaluation of the second-order matrix 



*vi CONTENTS 

element. Discussion of the cross section. Eikonal approximation. 
Scattering amplitude and cross section. Perfect absorber. 

39 Analytic Properties and Dispersion Relations 344 
Radial solutions. Jost function. Enhancement factor. Jost func- 
tion for large \k\. Bound states. Dispersion relations for the Jost 
function. Dispersion relation for In Ji{k). Effect of bound states. 

Le Vinson's theorem. Effective range. Forward scattering ampli- 
tude. Dispersion relation for T(E). Subtracted dispersion relation. 

Chapter 10 Identical Particles and Spin 362 

40 Identical Particles 363 

Physical meaning of identity. Symmetric and antisymmetric wave 
functions. Construction from unsymmetrized functions. The sym- 
metric group. Distinguishability of identical particles. The 
exclusion principle. Connection with statistical mechanics. Colli- 
sions of identical particles. 

41 Spin Angular Momentum 371 
Connection between spin and statistics. Spin matrices and eigen- 
functions. Collisions of identical particles. Electron spin functions. 

The helium atom. Spin functions for three electrons. 

42 Density Operator and Density Matrix 378 
Expectation value and projection operator. Density operator. 
Equations of motion. Projection operator for a spin \ particle. 
Density matrix for a spin jj particle. Polarization vector for a spin s 
particle. Precession of the polarization vector. 

43 Rearrangement Collisions 384 
Notation for rearrangement collisions. Alternative expression for 

the T matrix element. T matrix element for rearrangements. 
Presence of a core interaction. Elimination of the core term. 
Exchange collisions of electrons with hydrogen. Relation between 
amplitude and matrix element. Effects of identity and spin. 
Exchange collisions with helium. 

Chapter 11 Semiclassical Treatment of Radiation 397 

44 Absorption and Induced Emission 398 
Maxwell's equations. Plane electromagnetic waves. Use of pertur- 
bation theory. Transition probability. Interpretation in terms of 
absorption and emission. Electric dipole transitions. Forbidden 
transitions. 

45 Spontaneous Emission 406 
Classical radiation field. Asymptotic form. Radiated energy. 
Dipole radiation. Angular momentum. Dipole case. Conversion 
from classical to quantum theory. Planck distribution formula. 
Line breadth. 



CONTENTS xwii 

46 Some Applications of Radiation Theory 416 
Selection rules for a single particle. Polarization of emitted radia- 
tion. Conservation of angular momentum. Selection rules for 
many-part i c- 1 1 ■ systems. Photoelectric effect. Angular distribution. 
Cross section for the atomic photoelectric effect. Improvement on 

the Bom approximation. 

Chapter 12 Atoms, Molecules, and Atomic Nuclei 424 

47 Approximations in Atomic Structure 424 
Central-field approximation. Periodic system of the elements. 
Thomas-Fermi statistical model. Evaluation of the potential. 
Hartree's self-consistent fields. Connection with the variation 
method. Corrections to the central-field approximation. LS coupl- 
ing scheme. Selection rules, jj coupling scheme. 

48 The Alkali Atoms 436 
Doublet separation. Doublet intensity. Effect of a magnetic field. 
Weak-field case. Strong-field case. Quadratic Zceman effect. 

49 Molecules 445 
Classification of energy levels. Wave equation. The hydrogen 
molecule. Potential-energy function. The Morse potential. Rota- 
tion and vibration of diatomic molecules. Energy levels. Effect of 
nuclear identity. 

50 Atomic Nuclei 455 
General properties of nuclei. Tvvo-nucleon interaction. Neutruii- 
proton system. Arbitrary shape of potential. Relations for the 
phase shift. Effective range. Exchange operators. Proton-proton 
scattering. 

Chapter 13 Relativistic Wave Equations 466 

51 Schrodinger's Relativistic Equation 467 
Free particle. Electromagnetic potentials. Separation of the 
equation. Energy levels in a coulomb field. 

52 Dirac's Relativistic Equation 472 
Free-particle equation. Matrices for a and 0. Free-particle solu- 
tions. Charge and current densities. Electromagnetic potentials. 

53 Dirac's Equation for a Central Field 480 
Spin angular momentum. Approximate reduction; spin-orbit 
energy. Separation of the equation. The hydrogen atom. Classi- 
fication of energy levels. Negative energy states. 

Chapter 14 The Quantization of Wave Fields 490 

54 Classical and Quantum Field Equations 491 
Coordinates of the field. Time derivatives. Classical lagrangian 
equation. Functional derivative. Classical hamil toman equations. 



xviii CONTENTS 

Quantum equations for the field. Fields with more than one com- 
ponent. Complex field. 

55 Quantization of the Nonrelativistic Schrodinger Equation 498 
Classical lagrangian and hamiltonian equations. Quantum equa- 
tions. The jV representation. Creation, destruction, and number 
operators. Connection with the many-particle Schrodinger equa- 
tion. Anticomrnutation relations. Equation of motion. Physical 
implications of anticomrnutation. Representation of the anti- 
corn muting a k operators. 

56 Electromagnetic Field in Vacuum 508 
Lagrangian equations. Hamiltonian equations. Quantum equa- 
tions. Commutation relations for E and H. Plane wave repre- 
sentation. Quantized field energy. Quantized field momentum. 
A(r,0 in the plane wave representation. Commutation relations 

at different times. 

57 Interaction Between Charged Particles 

and the Electromagnetic Field 521 

Lagrangian and hamiltonian equations. Elimination of &lt;£. Quanti- 
zation of the fields. Inclusion of static fields. Perturbation theory 
of the interparticle interaction. Einstein-Bose case. Fermi-Dirac 
case. Radiation theory. Transition probability for absorption. 
Transition probability for emission. 

Index 535 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



1 

The Physical Basis of 
Quantum Mechanics 



At the present stage of human knowledge, quantum mechanics can be 
regarded as the fundamental theory of atomic phenomena. The experi- 
mental data on which it is based are derived from physical events that 
lie almost entirely beyond the range of direct human perception. It is 
not surprising, therefore, that the theory embodies physical concepts that 
are foreign to common daily experience. These concepts did not appear 
in the historical development of quantum mechanics, however, until a 
quite complete mathematical formalism had been evolved. The need 
for quantitative comparison with observation, which is the ultimate test 
of any physical theory, in this case led first to the formalism and only 
later to its interpretation in physical terms. 

It seems desirable in introducing the subject of quantum mechanics 
to depart from the historical order and preface the mathematical develop- 
ment with a discussion of the physical concepts. 1 In this chapter we first 
review briefly the experimental background and the ideas of the old 

1 For a detailed study of the historical development, see M. Jammer, "The Conceptual 
Development of Quantum Mechanics" (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966). 



2 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

quantum theory, then discuss the newer physical concepts of uncertainty 
and complementarity, and finally lay the groundwork for the formalism 
that will be developed in its most familiar form in Chap. 2. No attempt 
will be made to deduce the structure of the formalism from the funda- 
mental experiments; we shall try to make the theoretical development 
seem plausible rather than unique. The justification for the theory, 
then, will rest on the agreement between deductions made from it and 
experiments, and on the simplicity (in principle more than in practice) 
and consistency of the formalism. 



ID EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND 

Experimental physics prior to 1900 had demonstrated the existence of 
a wide variety of phenomena, which for the most part were believed 
to be explicable in terms of what we now call classical theoretical physics. 
The motions of mechanical objects were successfully discussed in terms 
of Newton's equations on both celestial and terrestrial scales. Appli- 
cation of this theory to molecular motions produced useful results in the 
kinetic theory of gases, and the discovery of the electron by J. J. Thomson 
in 1897 consisted in showing that it behaved like a newtonian particle. 
The wave nature of light had been strongly suggested by the diffraction 
experiments of Young in 1803 and was put on a firmer foundation by 
Maxwell's discovery in 1864 of the connection between optical and elec- 
trical phenomena. 

INADEQUACY OF CLASSICAL PHYSICS 

The difficulties in the understanding of experimental results that remained 
at the beginning of this century were largely concerned with the develop- 
ment of a suitable atomic model and with the late discoveries of x-rays 
and radioactivity. However, there were also difficulties associated with 
phenomena that should have been understood but actually were not : such 
things as the spectral distribution of thermal radiation from a blackbody, 
the low-temperature specific heats of solids, and the appearance of only 
5 degrees of freedom in the motion of a free diatomic molecule at ordinary 
temperatures. 

The beginning of an understanding of the second class of difficulties 
was made by Planck in 1900, when he was able to explain the blackbody 
spectrum in terms of the assumed emission and absorption of electro- 
magnetic radiation in discrete quanta, each of which contains an amount 
of energy E that is equal to the frequency of the radiation v multiplied 
by a universal constant h (called Planck's constant): 

E = hp (1.1) 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 3 

This quantum idea was later used by Einstein in accounting for some of 
the experimental observations on the* photoelectric effect. In this way 
the dual character of electromagnetic radiation became established: It 
sometimes behaves like a wave motion and sometimes like a stream of 
corpuscular quanta. 

At about this time, the existence of discrete values for the measur- 
able parameters of atomic systems (not only of electromagnetic radiation) 
became apparent through Einstein's and Debye's theories of the specific 
heats of solids, Ritz's classification of spectral lines, the experiment of 
Franck and Hertz on the discrete energy losses of electrons on collision 
with atoms, and (somewhat later) the experiment of Stern and Gerlach, 
which showed that the component of the magnetic moment of an atom 
along an external magnetic field has discrete values. 

SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL EXPERIMENTS AND INFERENCES 

The theoretical physics of the first quarter of this century thus contained 
two important inferences, obtained from the experiments and their inter- 
pretations, that had not existed in 1900: the dual character of electro- 
magnetic radiation and the existence of discrete values for physical quan- 
tities. The relations between the principal experimental conclusions and 
the theoretical inferences are shown schematically in Table 1 ; for a more 
detailed discussion and a bibliography, reference should be made to a 
book on atomic physics. 1 

A third theoretical inference appeared in 1924 with the suggestion 
by de Broglie that matter also has a dual (particlelike and wavelike) 
character; he assumed that the relation between the momentum p of any 
particle and the length X of the corresponding wave is 2 

X = * (1.2) 

V 

Up to that time all the evidence had indicated that matter was composed 
of discrete newtonian particles; in particular, sharp tracks of charged 
particles such as electrons and helium nuclei had been observed in expan- 
sion cloud chambers like that invented by C. T. R. Wilson in 1911. 
Shortly after this, however, Davisson and Germer (1927) and G. P. 
Thomson (1928) independently observed the diffraction of electrons by 
crystals and thus confirmed de Broglie's principal supposition. 

1 See, for example, F. K. Richtmyer, E. H. Kennard, and T. Lauritsen, "Introduction 
to Modern Physics" (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955); M. Born, "Atomic Physics" 
(Hafner, New York, 1951); G. P. Harnwell and W. E. Stephens, "Atomic Physics" 
(McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955). 

* Equation (1.2) is also valid for light quanta, as may be seen by dividing both sides 
ofEq. (1. 1) by the velocity of light, c; for a directed beam of light p = 2?/c and X = c/p. 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



Table 1 Relations between experimental 
interpretations and theoretical inferences 



Diffraction (Young 1803, Laue 1912) Electromagnetic waves 

Blackbody radiation (Planck 1900) \ 

Photoelectric effect (Einstein 1904) I _, . 

Compton effect (1923) f Electromagnetic quanta 

Combination principle (Ritz-Rydberg 1908)/ \ /Discrete 

Specific heats (Einstein 1907, Debye 1912) I lvalues for 

Franck-Hertz experiment (1913) j J physical 

Stern-Gerlach experiment (1922) / Vquantities 



2DTHE OLD QUANTUM THEORY 

What is now called the old quantum theory 1 was initiated by the work of 
Planck on blackbody radiation and was carried farther by Einstein and 
Debye. However, only after Rutherford's discovery in 1911 that an 
atom consists of a small, massive, positively charged nucleus surrounded 
by electrons could the theory be applied to a quantitative description 
of atoms. 

BOHR-SOMMERFELD QUANTIZATION RULES 

The first step in this direction was taken by Bohr in 1913, when he made 
two postulates concerning the electronic or extranuclear structure of an 
atom. The first of these was that an atomic system can exist in particular 
stationary or quantized states, each of which corresponds to a definite 
energy of the system. Transitions from one stationary state to another 
are accompanied by the gain or loss, as the case may be, of an amount of 
energy equal to the energy difference between the two states ; the energy 
gained or lost appears as a quantum of electromagnetic radiation, or as 
internal or kinetic energy of another system. The second postulate (in 
agreement with that of Planck and Einstein) was that a radiation 
quantum has a frequency equal to its energy divided by Planck's 
constant h. 

These two postulates by themselves provided some insight into the 
Ritz combination principle and the Franck-Hertz experiment. To obtain 
specific results for hydrogen, Bohr proposed a simple rule for the selection 
of the circular orbits that are to constitute stationary states : The angular 
momentum must be an integral multiple of h/2v. A more general quanti- 
zation rule was discovered independently by W, Wilson (1915) and by 

1 For a more detailed discussion than is presented in this section, see the books cited 
above, and L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, Jr., "Introduction to Quantum Mechanics," 
chap. II (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1935). 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 5 

Sommerf eld (1916), thus making possible the application of Bohr's postu- 
lates to a wider variety of atomic systems. This rule is applicable to 
hamiltonian systems in which the coordinates are cyclic variables; it 
states that the integral of each canonical momentum with respect to its 
coordinate over a cycle of its motion must be an integral multiple of h. 
The rule was applied with considerable success to the computation of the 
fine structure of hydrogen, the spectra of diatomic molecules, and other 
problems. 

PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES 

The old quantum theory encountered practical difficulties in several 
different respects. It could not be applied to aperiodic systems, it pro- 
vided only a qualitative and incomplete treatment of the intensities of 
spectral lines, and it did not give a satisfactory account of the dispersion 
of light. Moreover, improvements in experimental techniques soon 
showed that there were problems, such as the rotational spectra of some 
diatomic molecules, to which the theory gave unambiguous but incorrect 
answers. 

The correspondence principle was introduced by Bohr in 1923 in an 
effort to make use of the classical theory as a limiting case to infer some 
properties of atomic systems, especially the intensities of spectral lines. 
Although much was achieved in this way, it was clear in the early 1920's 
that the quantum theory as it then existed was unsatisfactory. 

CONCEPTUAL DIFFICULTIES 

Quite apart from the practical difficulties outlined above, the old quantum 
theory failed to give a conceptually satisfactory account of the funda- 
mental phenomena. It was difficult to understand why the electrostatic 
interaction between a hydrogen nucleus and an electron should be effective 
when the ability of the accelerated electron to emit electromagnetic radia- 
tion disappeared in a stationary state. The mechanism of emission and 
absorption of radiation in transitions between stationary states was 
obscure. The quantization rules were arbitrary even when they were 
most effective. And the assumption of a dual character for light (particle- 
like on emission and absorption and wavelike in transit) seemed to be 
self-contradictory. 

In order to illustrate the conceptual difficulties and the way in which 
they are dealt with by the new quantum mechanics, we consider in some 
detail a simple diffraction experiment, which is illustrated schematically 
in Fig. 1. A light source S illuminates a diaphragm A in which two slits 
are cut. A diffraction pattern appears at a photosensitive screen B, 
and the ejected photoelectrons are most numerous at the diffraction 
peaks. Here we have the radiation behaving as a wave during its passage 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



® 
S 



B 

Fig. 1 A diffraction experiment in which light from S passes 
through the two slits in A to form a diffraction pattern at B. 



from source through slits to screen, but behaving as a stream of light 
quanta or photons when it ejects electrons from B. We now know that a 
similar experiment could be set up with matter instead of radiation. The 
diffraction pattern of electrons scattered from a crystal (analogous to the 
slits in A) may be detected as a distribution of electron tracks in a Wilson 
cloud chamber (analogous to the screen B), so that the wave and particle 
aspects of matter appear in the same experiment. 

In the situation illustrated in Fig. 1, we might at first suppose that 
the diffraction pattern is due to an interference between different photons 
passing through the two slits, thus explaining the observations entirely 
in terms of the particle picture. That this is not a sufficient explanation 
may be shown by decreasing the intensity of the light until an average of 
only one photon at a time is in transit between source and screen. The 
diffraction pattern still appears as the distribution of the large number of 
photons accumulated over a sufficiently long time. Thus we must con- 
clude that diffraction is a statistical property of a single photon and does 
not involve an interaction between photons. From the point of view of 
the particle picture, we may then ask how it is that a stream of inde- 
pendent photons, each of which presumably can go through only one of 
the slits, can produce a diffraction pattern that appears only when both 
slits are open. Or to put the question in another way, how can the 
presence of a slit through which a photon does not go prevent that photon 
from reaching a part of the screen it would be likely to reach if that slit 
were closed? 

QUANTUM-MECHANICAL VIEWPOINT 

In this question is implicit the assumption that the photon actually does 
go through a particular one of the two slits. This assumption is natural 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS ' 

from the point of view of the classical theory or the old quantum theory, 
since these theories regard a photon or other particle as having a definite 
and determinable position at each instant of time. The quantum 
mechanics, however, discards this assumption and asserts instead that 
the position of a photon has meaning only when the experiment includes 
a position determination. Moreover, this part of the experiment will 
affect the remainder of the experiment and cannot be considered sepa- 
rately. Thus from the point of view of quantum mechanics, the question 
asked in the preceding paragraph is without meaning, since it assumes 
that the photon goes through a particular one of the two slits (thus 
making it possible to close the other slit) when there is no provision in the 
experiment for determining through which slit the photon actually goes. 
The quantum mechanics resolves the situation by telling us that the 
diffraction pattern is destroyed if a sufficiently careful attempt is made 
to determine through which slit each photon passes (see Sec. 4). We 
must then be prepared to forgo the customary mental picture of a photon 
(or an electron) as a classical particle that has at each instant of time a 
position that can be determined without damage to diffraction patterns 
of the type discussed here. Thus classical causality, which requires 
that the motion of a particle at any time be uniquely determinable from 
its motion at an earlier time, must also be abandoned. The new theory 
that is forced upon us in this way is so successful in other respects as well 
that, at the present state of knowledge, we must regard such classically 
incomplete descriptions as a fundamental property of nature. 

3DUNCERTAINTY AND COMPLEMENTARITY 

Before presenting a more quantitative discussion of the diffraction experi- 
ment outlined in Sec. 2, we consider two principles that express in qualita- 
tive terms the physical content of the theory of quantum mechanics. 
We restrict ourselves here to a discussion of their meaning and give 
arguments for their validity in Sec. 4. 

UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE 

The first of these is the uncertainty principle, developed by Heisenberg 1 
in 1927. According to this principle, it is impossible to specify precisely 
and simultaneously the values of both members of particular pairs of 
physical variables that describe the behavior of an atomic system. The 
members of these pairs of variables are canonically conjugate to each other 
in the hamiltonian sense : a rectangular coordinate x of a particle and the 
corresponding component of momentum p x , a component J z of angular 
momentum of a particle and its angular position 4&gt; in the perpendicular 

1 W. Heisenberg, Z. Physik 43, 172 (1927). 



' QUANTUM MECHANICS 

(xy) plane, the energy E of a particle and the time t at which it is meas- 
ured, etc. Put more quantitatively, the uncertainty principle states that 
the order of magnitude of the product of the uncertainties in the knowl- 
edge of the two variables must be at least Planck's constant h divided by 
2w(h ss h/2r = 1.0545 X 10~" erg-sec), 1 so that 

Ax • Ap x &gt; h ( 3-1 ) 

A&lt;f&gt; • AJ e &gt; h (3.2) 

At-AE&gt;h (3.3) 

The relation (3.1) means that a component of the momentum of a 
particle cannot be precisely specified without loss of all knowledge of the 
corresponding component of its position at that time, that a particle 
cannot be precisely localized in a particular direction without loss of all 
knowledge of its momentum component in that direction, and that in 
intermediate cases the product of the uncertainties of the simultaneously 
measurable values of corresponding position and momentum components 
is at least of the order of magnitude of h. Similarly, Eq. (3.2) means, 
for example, that the precise measurement of the angular position of a 
particle in an orbit carries with it the loss at that time of all knowledge 
of the component of angular momentum perpendicular to the plane of 
the orbit. 2 Equation (3.3) means that an energy determination that 
has an accuracy AE must occupy at least a time interval At ~ h/AE; 
thus if a system maintains a particular state of motion not longer than 
a time At, the energy of the system in that state is uncertain by at least 
the amount AE ~ h/At, since At is the longest time interval available for 
the energy determination. The smallness of h makes the uncertainty 
principle of interest primarily in connection with systems of atomic size. 

As we shall see in Sec. 12, the uncertainty principle may be obtained 
directly from the mathematical formulation of the theory, and this is 
actually the way in which it was first obtained by Heisenberg. 

COMPLEMENTARITY PRINCIPLE 

In order to understand the implications of the uncertainty principle in 
more physical terms, Bohr 3 introduced the complementarity principle in 
1928. This principle states that atomic phenomena cannot be described 
with the completeness demanded by classical dynamics; some of the 
elements that complement each other to make up a complete classical 
description are actually mutually exclusive, and these complementary 

1 E. R. Cohen and J. W. M. DuMond, Rev. Mod. Phys. 37, 537 (1965). 

* Because of the cyclic nature of &lt;/&gt;, Eq. (3.2) merits further attention ; see M. M Nieto 

Phys. Rev. Letters 18, 182 (1967). 

3 N. Bohr, Nature 121, 580 (1928); "Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature," 
especially pt. II (Cambridge, London, 1934); Phys. Rev. 48, 696 (1935). 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS ' 

elements are all necessary for the description of various aspects of the 
phenomena. From the point of view of the experimenter, the com- 
plementarity principle asserts that the physical apparatus available to 
him has such properties that more precise measurements than those 
indicated by the uncertainty principle cannot be made. 

This is not to be regarded as a deficiency of the experimenter or of 
his techniques. It is rather a law of nature that, whenever an attempt is 
made to measure precisely one of the pair of canonical variables, the other 
is changed by an amount that cannot be too closely calculated without 
interfering with the primary attempt. This is fundamentally different 
from the classical situation, in which a measurement also disturbs the 
system that is under observation, but the amount of the disturbance can 
be calculated and taken into account. Thus the complementarity prin- 
ciple typifies the fundamental limitations on the classical concept that 
the behavior of atomic systems can be described independently of the 
means by which they are observed. 

LIMITATIONS ON EXPERIMENT 

In the atomic field, we must choose between various experimental arrange- 
ments, each designed to measure the two members of a pair of canonical 
variables with different degrees of precision that are compatible with the 
uncertainty relations. In particular, there are two extreme arrange- 
ments, each of which measures one member of the pair with great pre- 
cision. According to classical theory, these extreme experimental 
arrangements complement each other; the results of both may be obtained 
at once and are necessary to supply a complete classical description of the 
system. In actuality, however, the extreme complementary experiments 
are mutually exclusive and cannot be performed together. 

It is in this sense that the classical concept of causality disappears in 
the atomic field. There is causality insofar as the quantum laws that 
describe the behavior of atoms are perfectly definite; there is not, however, 
a causal relationship between successive configurations of an atomic sys- 
tem when we attempt to describe these configurations in classical terms. 

4 DISCUSSION OF MEASUREMENT 

In this section we consider three fairly typical measurement experiments 
from the point of view of the new quantum mechanics. The first two 
are designed to determine the position and momentum of a particle by 
optical methods; the third is the diffraction experiment in Sec. 2. 

LOCALIZATION EXPERIMENT 

We consider a particular example of the validity of the uncertainty prin- 
ciple, making use of a position-momentum determination that is typical 



10 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



L ^ 




\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 




— &gt;- 


\ 


o 


1ft 


\ ' 


V 




V 




v 


P 




Fig. 2 An experiment for the localiza- 
tion of a particle P by means of one of the 
scattered quanta Q, which is focused by 
the lens L to form an image on the screen S. 



of a number of somewhat similar experiments that have been discussed 
in connection with measurements on particles and radiation fields. 1 We 
shall consider here the accuracy with which the x components of the 
position and momentum vectors of a material particle can be determined 
at the same time by observing the particle through a rather idealized 
microscope by means of scattered light. 

The best resolving power of the lens L shown in Fig. 2 is known 
(either experimentally or from the theory of wave optics) to provide an 
accuracy 

Ace ~ - — (4 i) 

sin e K * ' 

in a position determination, where X is the wavelength of the radiation 
that enters the lens, and e is the half angle subtended at the particle P 
by the lens. For simplicity, we consider the case in which only one of 
the light quanta Q is scattered onto the screen S. Because of the finite 
aperture of the lens, the precise direction in which the photon is scattered 
into the lens is not known. Then since Eq. (1.2) states that the momen- 
tum of the photon after it is scattered is h/X, 2 the uncertainty in the x 
component of its momentum is approximately (h/X) sin e. 

The x components of the momenta of the photon and the particle 
can be accurately known before the scattering takes place, since there is 
no need then to know the x components of their positions. Also, if our 
position measurement refers to the displacement of the particle with 
respect to the microscope, there is no reason why the total momentum of 
the system (particle, photon, and microscope) need be altered during the 
scattering. Then the uncertainty Ap x in the x component of the momen- 

1 See, for example, W. Heisenberg, "The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory," 
chaps. II, III (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1930); D. Bohm, "Quantum 
Theory," chap. 5 (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1951). 
* See footnote 2, page 3. 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS U 

turn of the particle after the scattering is equal to the corresponding 
uncertainty for the photon. 

Ap s ~ - sin e (4.2) 

If we combine Eq. (4.1) with Eq. (4.2), we see that just after the scatter- 
ing process 

Ax • Ap x ~ h (4.3) 

is the best that we can do for the particle. Thus a realistic accounting 
of the properties of the radiation gives a result in agreement with the 
uncertainty relation (3.1) for the particle. 

This experiment may also be considered from the point of view of 
the complementarity principle. The complementary arrangements differ 
in the choice of wavelength of the observed radiation: Sufficiently small 
X permits an accurate determination of the position of the particle just 
after the scattering process, and large X of its momentum. 

MOMENTUM DETERMINATION EXPERIMENT 

The experiment just discussed assumes that the momentum of the particle 
is accurately known before the measurement takes place, and then it 
measures the position. It is found that the measurement not only gives 
a somewhat inaccurate position determination but also introduces an 
uncertainty into the momentum. 

We now consider a different experiment in which the position is 
accurately known at the beginning and the momentum is measured. 
We shall see that the measurement not only gives a somewhat inaccurate 
momentum determination but also introduces an uncertainty into the 
position. We assume that the particle is an atom in an excited state, 
which will give off a photon that has the frequency v if the atom is at 
rest. Because of the doppler effect, motion of the atom toward the 
observer with speed v means that the observed frequency is given approxi- 
mately by 



VO 



(-0 



so that 



— fe- 1 ) 



(4.4) 



(4.5) 



Accurate measurement of the momentum mv by measurement of the 
frequency v requires a relatively long time t; the minimum error in the 



12 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

frequency measurement can be shown to be 

A 1 

Ay ~- (4.6) 

The instant at which the photon is emitted is uncertain by r; at this 
instant, the momentum of the atom decreases by hv/c, and its velocity 
decreases by hv/mc. This makes the subsequent position of the atom 
uncertain by the amount 

. _ hvr 

mc (4.7).. 

since the later the photon is emitted, the longer the atom has the higher 
velocity and the farther it will have traveled. This position uncertainty 
arises entirely because of the finiteness of t. If t were zero, and we knew 
the velocity and the velocity change on emission of the photon, we would 
know where the atom is at each instant; it is because r is finite that we 
do not know when the velocity changed and hence where the atom is at 
later times. 

The momentum uncertainty is obtained with the help of Eqs (4 5) 
and (4.6) : 

. . mc Av mc 
Ap x - m Av ~ ~ — (4 g) 

In the nonrelativistic case considered here, v/c « 1, and Eq. (4.4) shows 
that v « » . Then combination of Eqs. (4.7) and (4.8) leads to the 
minimum uncertainty relation (3.1). 

ANALYSIS OF DIFFRACTION EXPERIMENT 

Finally, we analyze the diffraction experiment of Sec. 2 from the point of 
view of the complementarity principle, assuming that the uncertainty 
principle is valid. Two contrasting arrangements, which would com- 
plement each other classically, are considered here. One of these is 
illustrated in Fig. 1. Since it is assumed that the distance from A to B 
is large compared with the distance between the two slits, and this in turn 
is large compared with the wavelength of the light, the distribution of 
intensity in the diffraction pattern determines to good approximation 
the angular distribution of the photons leaving the slits in A and hence 
determines the distribution of the y components of momentum of the 
photons beyond A. The second arrangement, shown in Fig. 3, deter- 
mines through which of the two slits each photon passes and hence 
provides information on the y coordinates of the photons. 

In the second arrangement each photon registers itself as it passes 
through a slit by bouncing off one of a number of indicators C placed 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 



13 



® 
S 



y&gt;. 




Fig. 3 The experimental arrangement of Fig. 1, modified by the addition 
of photon indicators C. 



close to A, giving up to it a y component of momentum that may be 
uncertain by the amount Ap y . If we do not want the resultant diffraction 
pattern of many such photons to be destroyed by these events, the 
uncertainty in p y for a particular photon produced by its encounter with 
an indicator must be substantially smaller than would be required to 
throw the photon from a maximum of the diffraction pattern at B into a 
neighboring minimum. With a photon of momentum p x , this requires 
that 

Ap y « 6p x (4.9) 

For the simple case in which R^&gt; a^&gt;\, the angle 6 is known experi- 
mentally (or from the theory of wave optics) to be given by 



6 = 



_X_ 
2a 



(4.10) 



in terms of the optical wavelength X and the distance a between the slits. 
At the same time, we have not learned through which slit this photon 
passed unless the uncertainty Ay of the y position of the indicator that 
recoiled is less than half the distance between slits. 

Ay &lt; %a (4.11) 

It then follows from Eqs. (4.9) to (4.11) and (1.2) that the require- 
ment that we be able to determine through which slit each photon passes 
without destroying the diffraction pattern at B is equivalent to the 
requirement that 

Ay • Ap v « \h (4.12) 



M QUANTUM MECHANICS 

for each indicator that is used. Since Eq. (4.12) is in disagreement with 
the uncertainty relation (3.1), we may conclude that it is impossible to 
determine through which slits the photons pass without destroying the 
diffraction pattern. 

DISCUSSION OF DIFFRACTION EXPERIMENT 

The situation just analyzed shows the intimate connection between the 
theoretical principles of uncertainty and complementarity and the experi- 
mental observations related to localization and diffraction. It provides 
an explicit demonstration of the validity of the complementarity principle 
(represented in this case by the choice between the mutually exclusive 
but classically complementary experiments for observing the diffraction 
and for localizing the photon) when taken in conjunction with the experi- 
mentally observable properties of matter and radiation. It shows that no 
fundamental difficulty need be encountered with the photon picture so 
long as we do not insist on the degree of detail in describing the situation 
that is entailed by classical concepts. 

It is, of course, still necessary to ascribe unfamiliar properties to the 
photons in order to explain the experimental observations. The fore- 
going discussion does not show how an individual photon can interfere 
with itself to produce the diffraction pattern, nor, on the other hand, does 
it show how an electromagnetic wave can eject photoelectrons from the 
screen. Such demonstrations lie beyond the scope of the qualitative 
discussion of this chapter and require the use of the mathematical for- 
malism of quantum mechanics. 1 However, analysis of the diffraction 
experiment from the point of view of quantum mechanics removes the 
difficulty encountered in Sec. 2; the diffraction pattern disappears when- 
ever a successful attempt is made to determine through which slit each 
photon passes. 2 

5QWAVE PACKETS IN SPACE AND TIME 

The relation (1.2) between momentum and wavelength, which is known 
experimentally to be valid for both photons and particles, suggests that 
it might be possible to use concentrated bunches of waves to describe 
localized particles of matter and quanta of radiation. To fix our ideas, 

1 Chapter 14 shows how the theory of the electromagnetic field can be modified to 
include quantum effects. 

8 The matters discussed in this section are discussed more fully in the early chapters 
of the books by R. P. Feynman and A. R. Hibbs, "Quantum Mechanics and Path 
Integrals," (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965) and by R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, 
and M. Sands, "The Feynman Lectures on Physics," vol. Ill (Addison-Wesley, Read- 
ing, Mass., 1965). 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 



15 




Fourier 
transform 

of 4! 



Ak J. 




(a) (b) 

Fig. 4 Plots of a typical wave packet ^-(x) and its Fourier transform. 

we shall consider a wave amplitude or wave function that depends on the 
space coordinates x, y, z and the time t. This quantity \p is assumed to 
have three basic properties. First, it can interfere with itself, so that it 
can account for the results of diffraction experiments. Second, it is large 
in magnitude where the particle or photon is likely to be and small else- 
where. And third, ^ will be regarded as describing the behavior of a 
single particle or photon, not the statistical distribution of a number of 
such quanta. This last is an essential requirement in view of the conclu- 
sion of Sec. 2 that a single quantum of matter or radiation interferes 
with itself rather than with other quanta. In this section we shall con- 
fine ourselves to a qualitative discussion of the one-dimensional case, in 
which the wave function ^ depends only on x and t, and leave the quan- 
titative development for Chap. 2. 

SPACE PACKETS 

A typical form for a concentrated bunch of waves, which we shall call a 
wave packet, is shown in Fig. 4a, where yf/{x,t) is plotted against x for a 
particular time t. The average wavelength X and the approximate 
extension Ax of the packet are indicated in the diagram. The Fourier 
integral analysis 1 of \f/ with respect to x is now of interest since it shows 
how \j/ may be built up out of continuous harmonic waves of various 
lengths. This is indicated in Fig. 46, in which the Fourier transform of ^ 
is plotted schematically against the propagation number k = 2w/X. 



1 See, for example, P. M. Morse and H. Feshbach, "Methods of Theoretical Physics,' 
sec. 4.8 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1953). 



16 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It can be shown by standard mathematical methods that 

Afc &gt; -i- (5.1) 

Ax 

where Ak is the approximate spread in propagation number associated 
with the packet. If now we correlate wavelength and momentum as in 
Eq. (1.2) we see that the spread Ak corresponds to a momentum spread 

Ap = A (j) = A Ak = h ■ Ak (5.2) 

Combination of Eq. (5.1) with Eq. (5.2) gives 

Ax ■ Ap &gt; h (5.3) 

which agrees with the uncertainty relation (3.1). Thus the uncertainty 
principle for position and momentum of a quantum of matter or radiation 
follows directly from the wave-packet description and Eq. (1.2). 

TIME PACKETS 

In analogous fashion, we may examine the dependence of \f/ on the time t 
for a point x that is typical of the packet, and we obtain a time Fourier 
transform that shows how \f/ can be built up out of continuous harmonic 
waves of various frequencies v. In this case the relation between the 
spread in time of \f/ and the spread in frequency of the time Fourier trans- 
form of \p is 

At-Ap&gt;^- (5.4) 

Equation (5.4) may be brought into correspondence with the uncer- 
tainty principle by associating the energy E of a quantum with the 
frequency of the wave that represents it in a manner similar to the 
association of momentum with wavelength given by Eq. (1.2). We 
shall make this connection through Eq. (1.1) : 

E = hv (5-5) 

which may be inferred in the case of photons from the experimental 
discussion of Sec. 1. Combination of Eq. (5.4) with Eq. (5.5) then gives 
the uncertainty relation (3.3). 

The assumption that Eq. (5.5) is valid for matter as well as for radia- 
tion may be made plausible by computing the group velocity 1 of a wave 
packet that represents a nonrelativistic particle of mass m, kinetic energy 
E, and momentum p for which X and v are given by Eqs. (1.2) and (5.5), 
respectively. The group velocity, which is the velocity of the center of 

1 Born, op. cit., pp. 88, 330. 



THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 17 

the packet, is equal to 

dp = dE = d(p*/2m) = P ,,. fi , 

d(l/\) dp dp m , K °- Ki) 

in agreement with the classical expression for the velocity. This shows 
that, with Eq. (5.5), the wave-packet description of the motion of a 
particle agrees with the classical description when the circumstances are 
such that we can ignore the size and internal structure of the packet. 

WAVE FORMALISM 

We see then that quanta of matter or radiation can be represented in 
agreement with the uncertainty principle by wave packets that may be 
superposed to produce interference and whose magnitudes give a measure 
of likelihood of location, provided that use is made of the experimentally 
inferred relations (1.2) and (5.5). It is then possible to set up a quan- 
titative formalism based on the mathematical analysis of wave motion. 
This will be done for matter in Chap. 2, using the physical principles 
outlined in this chapter as a guide and requiring always that the result 
of any calculation reduce to the result of the corresponding classical cal- 
culation in the appropriate limit. This requirement is a way of stating 
Bohr's correspondence principle, which was mentioned in Sec. 2. At the 
present time, when a reasonably complete quantum theory exists, the 
correspondence principle is mainly of interest in assuring that the for- 
malism has the proper classical limit, although it may also be of heuristic 
value in performing new calculations or extending the boundaries of the 
theory. 

It might at first be thought that the exclusive use of a wave for- 
malism for the description of matter in the next four chapters would 
conflict with the observed particle-wave duality discussed in Sec. 1 and 
hence disagree with the complementarity principle. This is not the case, 
however, for the formalism actually provides an understanding of all the 
measurable properties of matter, including, for example, the production of 
particle tracks in a cloud chamber. Thus it will be shown in Sec. 38 
that, if a single material particle is represented by a wave function of 
definite momentum and hence completely undetermined position, the 
probability of ionization of two or more molecules of the cloud-chamber 
gas is negligibly small unless the molecules lie very nearly along a line 
parallel to the momentum vector. 

It must be emphasized that these remarks are true only if a wave 
function of the type described in this section is always interpreted as 
representing just one particle of matter and not the statistical distribu- 
tion of a number of particles. When we wish to describe more than one 
particle, we must make use of a wave function that depends on the coor- 



18 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

dinates of all of them. The analogous analytical description of light 
quanta, which will be taken up quantitatively in Chap. 14, makes use 
of a somewhat different approach. This is mainly because photons 
(unlike particles as we consider them here) can be emitted or absorbed 
through interaction with matter, so that their number is not fixed. Thus 
a photon wave function would have to depend on a variable number of 
parameters, and it is desirable to avoid such a situation. 

PROBLEMS 

1. Give a brief description of each of the experiments referred to in Table 1, together 
with their interpretations. 

2. Describe briefly the Davisson-Germer and Thomson experiments and the use of 
the Wilson cloud chamber for the observation of particle tracks. 

3. A beam of silver atoms for a Stern-Gerlach experiment is produced by collimat- 
ing atoms that vaporize from silver held in a furnace at 1200°C. If the beam travels 
1 meter, use the uncertainty relation to find the order of magnitude of the smallest 
spot that can be obtained at the detector. 

4. A 1-ounce rifle bullet takes 0.5 sec to reach its target. Regarding the bullet as a 
mass point, and neglecting effects of air resistance and earth motion, find the order of 
magnitude of the spread of successive shots at the target under optimum conditions 
of aiming and firing. 

5. A perfectly elastic ping-pong ball is dropped in vacuum from a height equal to 
ten times its radius onto a perfectly elastic fixed sphere of the same radius. Neglecting 
effects due to earth motion, estimate the largest number of bounces against the fixed 
sphere that the ball can be expected to make under optimum conditions of release. 

6. A beam of monoenergetic electrons is used to excite a particular level of an atom 
in a Franck-Hertz experiment. If this level is of short duration, owing to radiation 
back to the ground state, show that the inelastically scattered electrons that have lost 
energy to produce the excited level will not all be expected to have the same final 
energy. If the excited level lasts about 10~ 10 sec, what is the order .of magnitude of 
the electron energy spread, measured in electron-volts? 

7. Discuss any connections you can think of that exist between the three uncertainty 
relations (3.1), (3.2), and (3.3). 

8. Derive the expression for the group velocity that is given as the left side of 
Eq. (5.6). 



2 

The Schrodinger 
Wave Equation 



This and the next several chapters are concerned with the nonrelativistic 
motion of a particle in a force field that can be represented by a potential 
energy. 1 A quantitative description of the motion in terms of a dif- 
ferential equation, the Schrodinger wave equation, is developed in this 
chapter and applied to a simple one-dimensional problem. Various 
assumptions have to be made as regards the structure of the wave equa- 
tion, the boundary and continuity conditions on its solutions, and the 
physical meaning of these solutions. These assumptions are given a high 
degree of plausibility in this chapter and the next by relating them to 
experimental results, mainly those that deal with the diffraction of 
material particles and with the existence of a classical limit to the quan- 
tum mechanics. However, no attempt is made to derive the formalism 
uniquely from a consideration of the experiments. The definitive test 

1 This is an idealization of the true situation, in which special relativity must be taken 
into account, particles can be created and destroyed, and interactions cannot be 
described by potentials. Nevertheless, it is extraordinarily useful in dealing with 
atoms, molecules, condensed matter, and atomic nuclei. 

19 



20 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

of the theory must, of course, be its internal consistency and the success 
with which deductions from it agree with particular experimental meas- 
urements; some examples will be worked out in Chaps. 4 and 5. 

6DDEVELOPMENT OF THE WAVE EQUATION 

The form of the Schrodinger wave equation is obtained in this section 
by generalizing the properties of the wave amplitude of Sec. 5. The 
remainder of this chapter presents a discussion of some of the properties 
of the equation and its solutions. 

TRAVELING HARMONIC WAVES 

The first task is to develop in more quantitative fashion the properties 
of the one-dimensional wave function \f/(x,t) that was discussed qualita- 
tively in Sec. 5. It was shown there that for a continuous traveling 
harmonic wave, the wavelength and momentum are related by Eq. (1.2) 
and the energy and frequency by Eq. (5.5). We rewrite these two equa- 
tions in terms of the universal constant h = h/2w: 

p = hk k = ^ (6.1) 

E = hu a, = 2ttv (6.2) 

A wave function \p(x,t) that represents a particle of completely 
undetermined position traveling in the positive x direction with precisely 
known momentum p and kinetic energy E would then be expected to 
have one of the forms 

cos (kx - at) sin (kx - at) e »(**-»» g-«*— o (6.3) 

or some linear combination of them. This follows from diffraction experi- 
ments like those of Davisson and Germer and of Thomson (see Sec. 1) 
and from the requirement that a wave packet of approximately the 
propagation number k and angular frequency a has a group velocity equal 
to that of a classical free particle of momentum p and energy E [see 
Eq. (5.6)]. 

NEED FOR A WAVE EQUATION 

In order to go beyond the very simplest problem of a continuous harmonic 
wave, it is very desirable to have an equation of which both the harmonic 
waves and more complicated waves are solutions. An example from a 
more familiar field of physics should help to clarify this point. In the 
case of three-dimensional sound waves in a gas, it is possible to obtain a 
solution of the problem of the scattering of sound by a rigid sphere by 
superposing plane harmonic waves traveling in various directions. But 
it is far simpler to solve the differential equation for sound waves directly 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION 21 

in spherical polar coordinates. If the temperature of the gas changes 
from point to point, no progress can be made in the general case without 
such a differential equation. The correct underlying equation for sound 
waves can be found from direct consideration of the mechanical properties 
of the gas. Although this is not the case with the equation of which the 
wave functions of Sec. 5 are solutions, it is no less imperative to find the 
form of the equation. The need for this becomes more evident when the 
wave function is to describe the motion of a particle under the influence 
of external forces; this situation turns out to be analogous to the propaga- 
tion of sound waves in an inhomogeneous gas. We shall, therefore, find 
an equation for \f/ and, having found it, shall regard it as a more funda- 
mental attribute of the wave functions than the harmonic forms (6.3). 

The equation must have two basic properties. First, it must be 
linear, in order that solutions of it can be superposed to produce inter- 
ference effects (in the three-dimensional case) and to permit the con- 
struction of wave packets. And, second, the coefficients of the equation 
must involve only constants such as k and the mass and charge of the 
particle, and not the parameters of a particular kind of motion of the 
particle (momentum, energy, propagation number, and frequency) . The 
reason for the latter requirement is that we shall want to leave open the 
possibility of superposing solutions that belong to different values of 
these parameters; this means that such a more general wave function 
cannot be a solution of an equation that involves the parameters in its 
structure. Since differential equations are the easiest to handle, it is 
worthwhile to try this type first, and it turns out that the requirements 
can be met by a differential equation. 

With all these considerations in mind, we look first at the most 
familiar one-dimensional wave equation, that which describes the motion 
of transverse waves on a string or plane sound waves in a gas : 

where 7 is the square of the wave velocity. Substitution of the forms 
(6.3) into Eq. (6.4) shows that each of the four harmonic solutions, and 
hence any linear combination of them, satisfies this differential equation 
if and only if we put 

y k* p 2 4m 2 (6 ' 5) 

where m is the mass of the particle that is to be described by Eq. (6.4). 
Because of the structure of Eq. (6.5) it is apparent that the coefficient 7 
that appears in Eq. (6.4) involves the parameters of the motion (E or p) ; 
we therefore discard this differential equation. 



22 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

THE ONE-DIMENSIONAL WAVE EQUATION 

In looking further for a suitable equation, it is helpful to note that 
differentiation with respect to x of wave functions like those of (6.3) 
has the general effect of multiplication of the function by k (and some- 
times also interchanging sine and cosine), whereas differentiation with 
respect to t has the general effect of multiplication by w. Then the rela- 
tion E = p 2 /2m, which is equivalent to the relation a&gt; = hk 2 /2m, suggests 
that the differential equation for which we are looking contains a first 
derivative with respect to t and a second derivative with respect to x. 



dt ~ y dx 



37 = T 3T2 ( 6 - 6 ) 



Substitution shows that the first two of the wave functions (6.3) are not 
solutions of Eq. (6.6) but that either of the last two may be (but not both 
at once) if the constant y is suitably chosen. In particular, if we choose 

_ ioi&gt; _ ihE _ ih ,„ -,. 

7 ~ ¥ ~ "p" ~ 2^ { } 

then the third of the wave functions (6.3) satisfies Eq. (6.6). Moreover, 
the value of y given by Eq. (6.7) involves only the constants h and m. 

We are thus led to the one-dimensional form of the Schrodinger 1 
wave equation for a free particle of mass m, which from Eqs. (6.6) and 
(6.7) may be written 

„ d* h 2 dV (a ON 

dt 2m dx 2 

The particular form in which Eq. (6.8) is written is significant insofar 
as its harmonic solution, the third of the wave functions (6.3), makes 
the left side E\p and the right side (jp 2 /2m)$. The fact that the solution 
e i(kz-at) j s complex is not in itself a defect of the formalism. We shall 
have to be certain that all predicted results of possible physical observa- 
tions are expressible in terms of real numbers, and this will supply a 
condition on the detailed interpretation of ^. 

EXTENSION TO THREE DIMENSIONS 

The foregoing one-dimensional treatment is readily extended to three 
dimensions. It is natural to rewrite Eq. (6.1) as 

p = hk k = |k| = y (6.9) 

iE. Schrodinger, Ann. Physik 79, 361, 489 (1926); 81, 109 (1926). The present 
treatment is somewhat different from that originally given by Schrodinger. 



THE SGHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION 23 

where k is called the propagation vector. Similarly, the third of the wave 
functions (6.3) becomes 

exp t(k • r - at) (6.10) 

where r is the position vector for the particle. Then, by an obvious 
extension of the argument that led up to Eq. (6.8), it is seen that the 
three-dimensional Schrodinger equation for a free particle that is repre- 
sented by the wave function ^(r,0 is 

A comparison of Eqs. (6.9) to (6.11) and the classical energy equation 

E - £ (6.12) 

suggests that, at least for a free particle, the energy and momentum can 
be represented by differential operators that act on the wave function \(/. 

E-+ihii P-* -ihV (6.13) 

at 

The development of Sees. 7, 8, 10, and 11 will show that these are also 
valid representations when the particle is not free. 



INCLUSION OF FORCES 

The next problem is to extend the free-particle wave equation (6.11) so 
that it includes the effects of external forces that may act on the particle. 
We shall assume for the present that these forces are of such a nature 
(electrostatic, gravitational, possibly nuclear) that they can be combined 
into a single force F that is derivable from a real potential energy V. 

F(r,t) = -VV(r,t) (6.14) 

Just as the classical relation between energy and momentum is used above 
to infer the structure of Eq. (6.11), so it is desirable now to start from the 
corresponding classical relation that includes external forces. This is 
simply expressed in terms of the potential energy 

E = £ + F(r '° (6 - 15) 

where E is now the total energy, and the first and second terms on the 
right side of Eq. (6.15) are the kinetic and potential energies of the 
particle, respectively. 



24 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Since V does not depend on p or E, Eqs. (6.15) and (6.13) suggest 
that Eq. (6.11) be generalized into 

* * " " ^ vv + VM * (6 - 16) 

This is the Schrodinger wave equation that describes the motion of a 
particle of mass m in a force field given by Eq. (6.14). 1 Although the 
introduction of Eq. (6.16) cannot claim as high a degree of plausibility 
as the derivation of the free-particle equation (6.11), the further discus- 
sion of the next section should make it more convincing. It is, of course, 
the agreement of solutions of Eq. (6.16) with experiment in particular 
cases that eventually demonstrates the validity and usefulness of this 
wave equation. 

7DINTERPRETATION OF THE WAVE FUNCTION 

The wave function if/(r,t), which is a solution of the wave equation (6.16), 
is now assumed to provide a quantum- mechanically complete description 
of the behavior of a particle of mass m with the potential energy V{t,t) 
and hence is analogous to the classical trajectory r(t). Thus far, the 
only interpretative guide available to us is that the wave function be 
large where the particle is likely to be and small elsewhere. This has to 
be supplemented with more detailed statements that enable us to get out 
of ^ the maximum amount of information permitted by nature, as was 
discussed in Sec. 3. As with the structure of the wave equation, the 
correctness of our interpretation of the wave function must be judged by 
logical consistency and appeal to experimental results. 

STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION 

The phrase "likely to be" in the preceding paragraph, together with the 
discussion of Sec. 3, indicates the need for interpreting yp in statistical 
terms. We can imagine a very large number of identical, independent, 
nonoverlapping regions of space, each large enough to contain all the 
physically interesting features of the motion, in each of which the behavior 
of a particle with the potential energy V(r,t) is described by the same wave 
function ^(r,0 ; in each case r is referred to the origin of the particular 
region. Or we can imagine a very large number of independent repeti- 
tions of the same motion in the same region of space, for each of which t 
is referred to the particular origin of the time. We then make the 

1 The development of the wavefunction in time can also be related to integrals over 
all possible paths of the particle; see R. P. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 20, 367 (1948), 
and the book by R. P. Feynman and A. R. Hibbs, "Quantum Mechanics and Path 
Integrals" (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965). 



THE SCHR6DINGER WAVE EQUATION 



25 



assumption, due to Born, 1 that the numerical result of the measurement 
at a particular time * (insofar as the time at which the measurement is 
made can be specified) of any physically meaningful quantity, such as 
position, momentum, or energy, will in general not be the same for all the 
regions. Rather, there will be a distribution of these numbers that can 
be described by a probability function. 

For example, we have seen in Sec. 5 that the result of a position 
determination is to be regarded as uncertain by an amount of the order 
of the linear dimensions of the wave function. It is natural therefore 
to regard yp as a measure of the probability of finding a particle at a par- 
ticular position with respect to the origin of its region. However, a 
probability must be real and nonnegative, whereas $ is complex in general. 
We therefore assume that the product of \f/ and its complex conjugate f* 
is the position probability density. 

P(r,t) = **(r,i)*(r,0 = |*(r,0| 2 C 7 - 1 ) 

This means that P(r,t) dx dy dz is to be the probability of finding a particle 
in its volume element dx dy dz about its point r at the time t, when a large 
number of precise position measurements are made on independent par- 
ticles each of which is described by the one-particle wave function ^(r,0- 

NORMALIZATION OF \p 

The probability of finding the particle somewhere in the region must be 
unity, so that Eq. (7.1) implies that the wave function is normalized: 

JXr,0N 3 r = 1 ( 7 - 2 ) 

where the integral extends over the entire region; here d 3 r is the three- 
dimensional volume element dx dy dz. If ^ is a wave packet of the type 
discussed in Sec. 5, the integral in Eq. (7.2) converges, and the numerical 
coefficient of ^ may be adjusted so that the integral is unity; such nor- 
malization does not change the fact that ^ is a solution of Eq. (6.16), 
which is homogeneous in \f/. There are, however, wave functions like 
that given in Eq. (6.10) for which the integral in Eq. (7.2) does not con- 
verge if taken over an infinite volume. Such wave functions require 
special consideration and will be discussed further in Sees. 10 and 11. 
For the present, we may think of the region of space in which such a 
wave function is defined as being arbitrarily large but finite; then the 
integral in Eq. (7.2) is over the finite volume of this region and converges, 
so that normalization is always possible. 

The coefficient of \j/ that normalizes it must be independent of the 
time in order that \f/ may satisfy the wave equation (6.16). Thus, if 

i M. Born, Z. Physik 37, 863 (1926); Nature 119, 354 (1927). 



2S QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Eq. (7.2) is satisfied at one instant of time, the interpretation of |^| 2 as a 
position probability density requires that the normalization integral be 
independent of the time. That this is actually the case may be shown 
by computing the time derivative of the integral of P over any fixed 
volume ft: 



s/.^ ft -/.K4f 



ih_ 

2m 

ih 

2m 

ih 

2m 



f a [**VV - (VY*M d 3 r 
j A [**V^ - (V**)*]. dA 



Here substitution has been made for d\p/dt from Eq. (6.16) and for d\f'*/d t 
from the complex conjugate of Eq. (6.16). The last integral is obtained 
by partial integration (use of Green's theorem), where A is the bounding 
surface of the region of integration and [ ]„ denotes the component of 
the vector in brackets in the direction of the outward normal to the 
surface element dA. 1 

We define a vector S(r,t), 

S(r,0 = ^ [+*V+ - WW (7.3) 

in terms of which 

| f Q P(r,t} d°r=-f a V.Sd*r=- £ S n dA (7.4) 

In the case of a wave packet, for which if/ vanishes at great distances and 
the normalization integral converges, the surface integral is evidently 
zero when ft is the entire space. For a wave function of the type given 
in Eq. (6.10), \p can be defined in a finite region ft so that it vanishes or 
has a periodic structure along the bounding surfaces (see Sec. 10). In all 
these cases, it can be shown without difficulty that the surface integral in 
Eq. (7.4) is zero, so that the normalization integral in Eq. (7.2) is constant 
in time. 

PROBABILITY CURRENT DENSITY 

The derivation of Eq. (7.4) also shows that the differential relation 

dP(T,t) 



dt 



+ V . S(r,0 = 



1 It is convenient to adopt an order of factors such that ^* precedes \p [see the discussion 
of Eq. (7.7) below]. 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION 27 

is valid. This has the familiar form associated with the conservation of 
flow of a fluid of density P and current density S, in which there are no 
sources or sinks. It is thus reasonable to interpret S(r,0 given by Eq. 
(7.3) as a ■probability current density. This interpretation makes more 
plausible the identification of — ihV with the momentum in Eq. (6.13), 
even when a force is present. Then (h/im)V is the velocity operator, 
and it is apparent that 



S(r,0 = real part of 



\ tm J 



Although this interpretation of S is suggestive, it must be realized 
that S is not susceptible to direct measurement in the sense in which P is. 
It would be misleading, for example, to say that S(j,t) is the average 
measured particle flux at the point r and the time t, because a measure- 
ment of average local flux implies simultaneous high-precision measure- 
ments of position and velocity (which is equivalent to momentum) and is 
therefore inconsistent with the uncertainty relation (3.1). Nevertheless, 
it is sometimes helpful to think of S as a flux vector, especially when it 
depends only slightly or not at all on r, so that an accurate velocity 
determination can be made without impairing the usefulness of the con- 
cept of flux. 

EXPECTATION VALUE 

The existence of the position probability density P(r,t) makes it possible 
to calculate what we shall call the expectation value of the position vector 
of a particle, which is defined as the vector whose components are the 
weighted averages of the corresponding components of the position of the 
particle. The expectation value is the mathematical expectation (in the 
sense of probability theory) for the result of a single measurement, or 
it is the average of the results of a large number of measurements on 
independent systems of the type discussed at the beginning of this sec- 
tion. We write the expectation value of r as 

(r&gt; = jrP{T,t) dh = j+*(x,t)t+(T,t) d 3 r (7.5) 

which is equivalent to the three equations 

(x) = fyf/*x\(/ d 3 r (y) = j^*y^ d 3 r (z) = j\l/*z\f/ d 3 r 

where \J/ is normalized. The expectation value is a function only of the 
time, since \p and P depend on t and the space coordinates have been 
integrated out. 

The expectation values of any other physically meaningful quan- 
tities can be found in a similar way if they are functions only of the 



28 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

particle coordinate r. Thus the expectation value of the potential 
energy is 

(V) = fV(r,t)P(T,t) dh = f+*(r,t)V(r,t)+(r,t) dh (7.6) 

A quantity such as momentum or energy must, however, be expressed 
in terms of r and t before a calculation of this type can be made. We 
assume that it is possible to use the differential-operator representations 
given in Eq. (6.13) for this purpose and will justify this assumption with 
the help of the corresponding probability functions in Sec. 10 (for the 
energy) and in Sec. 11 (for the momentum). The question immediately 
arises, however, as to how such differential operators are to be combined 
with the position probability density P. 

This question may be answered by imposing on the expectation 
values the reasonable requirement that 

in analogy with the classical energy equation (6.15). In terms of dif- 
ferential operators, this may be written 

&lt;*D-(-5; v, } + &lt; v &gt; (7 - 7) 

It is apparent that Eq. (7.7) is consistent with the wave equation (6.16) 
only if the expectation value is defined in the general case with the opera- 
tor acting on \f/ and multiplied on the left by ^*. We therefore obtain, 
for example, 

(E) = J +*ih^d 3 r (p) = j +*(-ih)Vfd 3 r (7.8) 

Like Eq. (7.5), the second of Eqs. (7.8) is equivalent to the three com- 
ponent equations 



dy 



&lt;p-&gt; = -ih \**f x d 3 r &lt;p„&gt; = -i* / * 



d 3 r 



d$ 



(p z ) = —ih j \f/* j^ d 3 r 



EHRENFEST'S THEOREM &gt; 



It is reasonable to expect the motion of a wave packet to agree with the 
motion of the corresponding classical particle whenever the potential 
energy changes by a negligible amount over the dimensions of the packet. 

1 P. Ehrenfest, Z. Physik 46, 455 (1927). 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION » 

If we mean by the "position" and "momentum" vectors of the packet the 
weighted averages or expectation values of these quantities, we can show 
that the classical and quantum motions always agree. A component of 
the "velocity" of the packet will be the time rate of change of the expecta- 
tion value of that component of the position; since (z) depends only on 
the time and the x in the integrand of Eq. (7.5) is a variable of integration, 
this is 

i &lt;*&gt; - a / **** *+ - 1 +** ft dh + / 3sr * d ' r 

This may be simplified by substituting for the time derivatives of the 
wave function and its complex conjugate from Eq. (6.16) and canceling 
the V terms, where we continue to assume for the present that V is real : 



- / (- ^ V V* + V**\ x* d 3 r\ 
= ^/ W'MVV) - (VV*)atfl d 3 r 
The second integral can be integrated by parts : 

f (VV*W d'r = - f (Vxfr*) • V(xf) d 3 r + f A (xW% dA 

where the integral of the normal component of xrf/Vxp* over the infinite 
bounding surface A is zero because a wave packet ^ vanishes at great 
distances. A second partial integration, in which the surface integral 
again vanishes, results in 



J (VY*)z* d 3 r = J&gt;*V 2 (:#) d*r 


Thus 




d . . 
dt {x) = 


Y~ / **[sVY - V 2 (a^)] dh 


= 


m J dx m x 



(7.9) 

Since (x) is seen always to be a real number from the structure of Eq. (7.5), 
Eq. (7.9) shows quite incidentally that (p x ) is real; this can also be shown 
from the second of Eqs. (7.8) when yp represents a wave packet, by means 
of a partial integration. 



30 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

In similar fashion we can calculate the time rate of change of a com- 
ponent of the "momentum" of the particle as 

-/'•[sw-"s] ft 

--/,.g,*r-(_|E) (7.10) 

again substituting from the wave equation and integrating twice by parts. 
Equations (7.9) and (7.10), together with their other components, 
constitute Ehrenfest's theorem. They are analogous to the classical equa- 
tions of motion: 

dt m dt 

Ehrenfest's theorem provides an example of the correspondence principle, 
since it shows that a wave packet moves like a classical particle whenever 
the expectation value gives a good representation of the classical variable ; 
this is usually the macroscopic limit in which the finite size and the 
internal structure of the packet can be ignored. 

8DENERGY EIGENFUNCTIONS 

The Schrodinger wave equation (6.16) admits of considerable simplifica- 
tion when the potential energy V{x) does not depend on the time. It is 
then possible to express its general solution as a sum of products of 
functions of r and t separately. 

SEPARATION OF THE WAVE EQUATION 

We consider a particular solution of Eq. (6.16) that can be written as a 
product: ^(r,0 = u(r)f(t). A general solution can then be written as a 
sum of such separated solutions. If we substitute into Eq. (6.16) and 
divide through by the product, we obtain 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION 31 

Since the left side of Eq. (8.1) depends only on t and the right side only 
on r, both sides must be equal to the same separation constant, which we 
call E. Then the equation for / is readily integrated to give 

where C is an arbitrary constant, and the equation for u becomes 

["£ V2 + 7(r) ] w(r) =Eu(T) (8:2) 

Since Eq. (8.2) is homogeneous in u, the constant C may be chosen to 
normalize u. Then a particular solution of the wave equation is 

*(r,fl = tt(r)e-*«* (8.3) 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE SEPARATION CONSTANT E 

The time-derivative operator given in Eq. (6.13) as a representation of the 
total energy may be applied to the \j/ of Eq. (8.3) to give 

ih^ = E* (8.4) 

An equation of the type of Eq. (8.4) is called an eigenvalue equation; \f/ 
is said to be an eigenfunction of the operator that appears on the left, 
and the multiplying constant E that appears on the right is called the 
corresponding eigenvalue. 1 An energy eigenfunction,. like the ^ in Eq. 
(8.3), is said to represent a stationary state of the particle, since |^| 2 is 
constant in time. 

Equation (8.2) is also an eigenvalue equation. It states that u (and 
hence also ^) is an eigenfunction of the operator —(h 2 /2m)V 2 + V(r) 
with the same eigenvalue E. It is, of course, to be expected that \j/ is 
an eigenfunction of this operator if it is an eigenfunction of the time- 
derivative operator since, according to the wave equation (6.16), the two 
operators are equivalent not only for separated functions of the form of 
Eq. (8.3) but also for more general solutions. 

We now anticipate the discussion of the physical significance of 
eigenf unctions and eigenvalues that will be presented in Chap. 3 and 
assume that the energy eigenvalues E are the only possible results of 
precise measurements of the total energy of the particle. It is then of 
interest to inquire whether or not physically interesting solutions w(r) 
of Eq. (8.2) exist for all real values of E. An answer cannot be obtained 
until a specification of "physical interest" is found in terms of the bound- 
ary conditions that are imposed on u{v). This specification and the 

1 The terms characteristic function and characteristic value are often used in place of 
eigenfunction and eigenvalue. 



32 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

general character of the energy eigenvalues that are associated with 
various types of potential energy function V(r) are considered in the 
remainder of this section. 

BOUNDARY CONDITIONS AT GREAT DISTANCES 

We have thus far encountered two classes of wave functions: wave 
packets that are well localized and for which the normalization integral 
J\\f/\ 2 d 3 r converges, and traveling harmonic waves like the function (6.10) 
that have a constant magnitude at great distances so that the normaliza- 
tion integral taken over an infinite volume diverges. The first class may 
be interpreted as representing particles that, if free, are initially well 
localized or that are restrained to a particular region of space by external 
forces derived from the potential energy V(r). The second class repre- 
sents particles that are neither localized nor restrained but travel through 
the region under consideration from one distant part of space to another; 
such wave functions will be useful in describing the scattering of particles 
by a field of force. 1 In either case, the wave functions are bounded at 
great distances in all directions. 

CONTINUITY CONDITIONS 

The time-independent wave equation (8.2) is a second-order linear dif- 
ferential equation in r. Thus so long as F(r) is finite, whether or not it is 
continuous, a knowledge of the wave function and its gradient along a 
surface makes it possible to integrate the equation to obtain the wave 
function at any point. It is reasonable, therefore, to require that the 
wave function and its gradient be continuous, finite, and single-valued 
at every point in space, in order that a definite physical situation can be 
represented uniquely by a wave function. These requirements also have 
the consequence that the position probability density P(r) and the prob- 
ability current density S(r), defined in Sec. 7, are finite and continuous 
everywhere. 

BOUNDARY CONDITIONS FOR INFINITE POTENTIAL ENERGY 

If V(i) is infinite anywhere, the appropriate boundary condition can be 
established by a limiting process that starts from a finite V and the 
above continuity conditions. 

Suppose, for example, that there is an infinite discontinuity in V 
across a continuous surface, so that the potential energy is finite on one 
side of it and + °° on the other, and we wish to determine the boundary 

1 Another possible class consists of wave functions that become infinite at large dis- 
tances; however, these are not of physical interest, since we have no reason to be 
concerned with particles for which the position probability density becomes indefi- 
nitely large in remote regions of space. 



THE SCHRODINGEfc WAVE EQUATION 33 

conditions on w(r) and Vu at this surface. The essential features of 
the problem are retained if we replace the continuous surface by the 
plane that is tangent to it at the point of interest and the continuously 
changing potential energy on one side of the surface by a constant poten- 
tial, which can, without loss of generality, be chosen to be zero since any 
constant change in V is equivalent to an equal change in E. We choose 
the origin of coordinates at the point of interest and the x axis perpendic- 
ular to the tangent plane. 

The wave equation (8.2) then separates in the three space coordi- 
nates, and the dependence of u on y and z is not affected by the dis- 
continuity in V at the plane x = 0. We wish therefore to solve the 
one-dimensional wave equation 

- s a? + '«•-*■ (8 - 5) 

where V(x) — for x &lt; 0, V(x) = V for x &gt; 0, and we eventually 
pass to the limit V — * + °° • If we assume that &lt; E &lt; V , the general 
solutions of Eq. (8.5) are 

u{x) = A sin ax + B cos ax x &lt; a = + I &gt; 2 1 

u(x) = Ce+* + Defi' x&gt;0 P = + j 2m(y^- ff) j» 

The boundary condition that u be bounded at great distances requires 
that we set D = 0. Then the continuity of u at x = gives the relation 
B = C, and the continuity of du/dx gives the relation a A =■ —pC. 
Since becomes infinite when V does, and the solution for x &lt; must 
be finite, the second relation shows that C becomes zero as V — &gt; «, 
thus also making B zero; A is not determined from these relations but 
might be fixed by normalization. 

Thus the boundary conditions at a surface at which there is an infi- 
nite potential step are that the wave function is zero and the component 
of the gradient of the wave function normal to the surface is not deter- 
mined. The assumption above that E &lt; V is evidently not a restriction 
since V eventually becomes infinite. For E &lt; 0, the sine and cosine 
in the solution for x &lt; are replaced by hyperbolic sine and cosine (which 
is permissible since the solution need hold only near x = 0), with no 
change in the final result. It should be noted that both P and S* vanish 
asa;-&gt;0 from the negative side, so that they are continuous at x = 
even though du/dx is not. 

A boundary surface of this type represents a perfectly rigid, impene- 
trable wall, since in the analogous classical situation a particle of any 
finite energy would have its x component of momentum reversed instan- 
taneously on contact with the surface. 



34 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



ENERGY EIGENVALUES IN ONE DIMENSION 

Energy eigenfunctions that represent particles that are restrained to a 
particular region of space by the potential energy (first class) are always 
characterized by discrete eigenvalues, whereas eigenfunctions that do not 
vanish at great distances (second class) possess a continuous range of 
eigenvalues. This may be seen qualitatively by considering the nature 
of the solutions of the one-dimensional wave equation (8.5). 

We shall suppose at first that V(x) becomes equal to some constant 
value, which may be taken to be zero, for sufficiently large positive and 
negative x and that E &lt; 0. A classical particle with this total energy E 
cannot escape to infinity and, indeed, can exist in the region only if E is 
greater than or equal to the smallest value F min of V(x). The permitted 
form of the wave function for \x\ large enough that V = is evidently 
e -/3W w here = +(-2mE/h 2 )*. These two solutions for large positive 
and negative x can be extended in toward some intermediate point, say 
x = 0, by making use of the wave equation and the continuity conditions. 
At this point, u can always be made continuous by choosing the arbitrary 
multiplying constants for the positive and negative x solutions appropri- 
ately. Then a little reflection shows that, for an arbitrary value of E, 
they will not meet with the same value of du/dx. There may, however, 
be particular values of E for which both u and du/dx are continuous at 
x = 0. The conditions for this can be seen in the following way. 

In the regions in which E &lt; V(x), (d 2 u/dx 2 )/u is positive, and so u is 
convex toward the x axis. Thus the two solutions that are continued in 
from + oo have opposite signs for their ratios of slope to value, (du/dx) /u, 
so long as they are in regions for which E is always less than V. This is 
illustrated in Fig. 5b for the potential shown in Fig. 5a; both choices of the 
sign of u are shown for x &lt; 0. The points at which E = V(x) are called 
the turning points (TP) of the classical motion, since they are the limits of 
the motion of a classical particle of energy E, at which the particle turns 
around or reverses its motion. At these points d 2 u/dx 2 = 0, and u has 
zero curvature. 

Clearly what is needed to make the two solutions join smoothly is a 
region in which E &gt; V(x), in order that (d 2 u/dx 2 )/u may be negative and 
u be concave toward the x axis; this may permit the ratios of slope to value 
to become equal. Figure 5c shows the two solutions carried in until they 
meet, but for a somewhat small value of E, so that when the u's are made 
the same at x — the slopes are not equal (solid curves), or when the 
slopes are made the same at x — the u's are not equal (dotted curve on 
left and solid curve on right). Figure 5d shows a somewhat larger (less 
negative) value of E, and Fig. 5e a still larger value. The values of E 
and V min are indicated on the u axis, and the turning points are indicated 
on the x axis, in the last three cases. 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION 
V(x) 



35 




lrfu &gt;0 
udx 



(b) 



u(x) 



ldu 



ua &lt;0 



udx 





'--...JT 



(e) 



u(x) 




Fig. 5 (a) Potential-energy function and (6) solutions for large |x|; (c) and (e) show 
that either the wave function or its slope is discontinuous at x = for values of E 
that are smaller (more negative) and larger, respectively, than the energy eigenvalue 
shown in (d). 



DISCRETE ENERGY LEVELS 



We see then that an eigenfunction that satisfies the boundary and 
continuity conditions, and that represents a particle bound by the 
potential energy V(x), can exist for the particular value of E illustrated 
in Fig. 5d. In analogy with the classical situation, a necessary condition 



36 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



that such an eigenfunction exist is that V mia &lt; 0, in which case E lies 
between V mia and 0; as in the classical case, this condition is also sufficient 
in one dimension although it is not in three dimensions (see Prob. 10, 
Chap. 4, and Sees. 9 and 15). 

If the potential energy well illustrated in Fig. 5a is sufficiently broad 
or deep, there will exist another eigenfunction corresponding to a larger 
energy eigenvalue that is still negative. Figure 6a, b, and c show a series 
of wave functions analogous to those shown in Fig. 5c, d, and e for suc- 
cessively increasing (successively less negative) values of E; both signs 
of u are shown for x &lt; 0. Thus Figs. 5d and 66 show the eigenfunctions 
for the two lowest energy eigenvalues or energy levels of a particle bound 
by the potential well V(x). It is easy to see by an extension of the fore- 
going qualitative arguments that, if there are any higher discrete energy 
levels, each eigenfunction has one more node than that corresponding to 
the next lowest eigenvalue. 



u(x) 




Fig. 6 Solutions for sufficiently broad or deep potential and larger (less negative) 
values of E than those shown in Fig. 5. E increases from (a) to (b) to (c) and is 
an eigenvalue in (6), where the wave function and its slope can both be continuous 
at x = 0. 



37 



THE SCHR5DINGER WAVE EQUATION 

Thus, for a potential energy that approaches a finite constant value 
as x -» ±«, there may be a finite number of discrete energy levels, or in 
some cases an infinite number [if V(x) falls off slowly enough for large 
|x|], depending on V(x) and the mass of the particle. However, if 
y(x) -* + oo as x — &gt; ± oo , an argument like that given above shows that 
there will always be an infinite number of discrete energy levels; apart 
from arbitrary multiplying constants there will be just one eigenf unction 
u(x) for each of these. 

CONTINUOUS ENERGY EIGENVALUES 

It is possible to find eigenfunctions that obey the boundary and continuity 
conditions for all energy eigenvalues that exceed the smaller of the two 
numbers V(+ oo ) and V(— &lt;» ). If, for example, the potential energy has 
the form illustrated in Fig. 5a, then solutions of the wave equation can be 
found for all positive values of E. This is because the solutions for large 
\x\ are of the form 

A sin a|sc| + B cos a\x\ a = + ( -jj-j- ) ( 8 - 6 ) 

and there is no reason why both terms should not be kept. Thus it is 
always possible to adjust the phase of each of the wave functions for large 
|z| (which is equivalent to adjusting the ratios A/B for the solutions for 
large positive and negative x) so that they join together smoothly when 
continued in to x = 0. 

The classical terms periodic (or multi-ply periodic) and aperiodic are 
sometimes used to designate the particle motions associated with discrete 
and continuous energy eigenvalues, respectively. 

DISCRETE AND CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES IN THREE DIMENSIONS 

We shall assume without further discussion that all the foregoing results 
can be taken over in a natural way for the three-dimensional wave equa- 
tion (8.2) . We can expect that, if V(i) -&gt; + » as r -&gt; &lt;» in all directions, 
there will be an infinite set of discrete energy levels extending to + » . 
If V(r) is bounded as r -* oo in some direction, there may be a finite or an 
infinite number of discrete levels, depending on the form of V. In this 
case, the discrete energy levels cannot exceed the smallest value that 
V(oo) has in any direction. For values of E larger than this smallest 
V( oo ), the energy eigenvalues cover a continuous range extending to + oo . 

9D0NE-DIMENSI0NAL SQUARE WELL POTENTIAL 

As a simple explicit example of the calculation of discrete energy levels 
of a particle in quantum mechanics, we consider the one-dimensional 



38 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



To 

+ 00 



V(x) 



To 

+ 00 



V(x) 

■Vo 



(a) 



(b) 



Fig. 7 One-dimensional square well potential with (a) perfectly 
rigid walls and (b) finite potential step. 



motion of a particle that is restrained by reflecting walls that terminate a 
region of constant potential energy. Two simple types of potential 
energy are considered. Figure la shows a situation in which V(x) = 
for —a&lt;x&lt;a, and V(x) = -f &lt;x&gt; for |x| &gt; a, corresponding to per- 
fectly rigid, impenetrable walls at the points x = ±a. In Fig. lb the 
increase in potential energy at the walls is abrupt but finite, so that 
V(x) = V for |x| &gt; a; because of its appearance, this is often called a 
square well potential. The motion of a classical particle with total energy 
E less than V is the same for both these potentials; but, as we shall see, 
the quantum-mechanical behavior is different. In general, an abrupt 
finite increase in potential energy at the boundaries of a region forces a 
particle toward the interior of the region. Such a potential may be 
thought of as a limiting case of a potential of the type shown in Fig. 5a, for 
which the force — dV/dx is always directed in toward x = 0. The force 
associated with a square well potential is zero except at the boundaries, 
so that the particle is acted on by no force except a sudden impulse 
directed toward the origin as it passes the points x = ± a. 

PERFECTLY RIGID WALLS 

It was shown in Sec. 8 that the wave function must vanish at the points 
x = ±a, when the potential energy has the form shown in Fig. 7a. 
From Eq. (8.5) the wave equation for \x\ &lt; a is simply 

h?_d}u 
2m dx 2 



— 7T- -r-^ = Eu 



(9.1) 



which has the general solution 

u(x) = A sin ax + B cos ax 



, /2mE\h 



(9.2) 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION 59 

Application of the boundary conditions at x = ±a gives 

A sin aa + B cos aa = 
— A sin aa + B cos aa = 

from which we obtain 

A sin aa = 5 cos aa = 

Now we do not want both A and B to be zero, since this would give 
the physically uninteresting solution u = everywhere. Also, we cannot 
make both sin aa and cos aa zero for a given value of a or i?. There are 
then two possible classes of solutions : For the first class 

A = and cos aa = 

and for the second class 

B — and sin aa = 

Thus aa = nx/2, where n is an odd integer for the first class and an 
even integer for the second class. The two classes of solutions and their 
energy eigenvalues are then 

u(x) = B cos -~— n odd 

, . , . nirx 
u(x) = A sin -jr— n even 

2a 

E = -= — - in both cases 

8ma 2 

It is evident that n = gives the physically uninteresting result u = 
and that solutions for negative values of n are not linearly independent 
of those for positive n. The constants A and B can easily be chosen in 
each case so that the eigenfunctions u(x) are normalized. 

There is thus an infinite sequence of discrete energy levels that cor- 
respond to all positive integer values of the quantum number n. There 
is just one eigenfunction for each level, and the number of nodes of the 
nth eigenfunction that are within the potential well is n — 1. These 
results are in agreement with the discussion of Sec. 8. It is interesting to 
note that the order of magnitude of the lowest or ground-state energy 
level is in agreement with the uncertainty relation (3.1). The position 
uncertainty of order a implies a momentum uncertainty at least of order 
h/a, which in turn implies a minimum kinetic energy of order h 2 /ma 2 . 

FINITE POTENTIAL STEP 

When the potential energy has the form shown in Fig. 76, it is necessary 
to supplement the general solution (9.2), which is still valid for \x\ &lt; a 



40 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

since Eq. (9.1) is unaltered there, by a solution for \x\ &gt; a. The wave 
equation in this region is 

h 2 d 2 u , Tr „ 

-^dx~ 2 + VaU = Eu 

which has the general solution for E &lt; V (bound states) 

u(x) = Ce-e* + D* fi = + l" 2 ™^- #) j* ( 9 .3) 

The boundary conditions at x = ± oo discussed in Sec. 8 require that we 
set D = if Eq. (9.3) is, to represent the solution for x &gt; a, and C = 
if the solution is for x &lt; —a. 

We now impose on the solutions (9.2) and (9.3) the requirements 
that u and du/dx be continuous at x = +a. 

A sin aa + B cos aa = Ce~ ffa 
a A cos aa — aB sin aa = — pCe~P a 
— A sin aa .+ B cos aa = De~ ffa 
aA cos aa + aB sin aa = 0De~ pa 

from which we obtain 

2A sin aa = (C - D)e~ f)a 2aA cos aa = —&amp;{C — D)e~ fia 

(9.4) 

2B cos aa = (C + D)e-"« 2a£ sin aa = 0(C + D)e~^ 

(9.5) 

Unless A = and C = D, Eqs. (9.4) have as their consequence 

a cot aa = — j8 (9.6) 

Similarly, unless 5 = and C = — Z&gt;, Eqs. (9.5) give 

a tan aa = (9.7) 

Now it is impossible for Eqs. (9.6) and (9.7) to be valid at once, since 
on elimination of /3 this would require that tan 2 aa = —1, which in turn 
would make a imaginary and negative, contrary to Eq. (9.3). Also, we 
do not want A, B, C, and D all to vanish. Thus the solutions may again 
be divided into two classes : For the first class 

A = C — D and a tan aa = p 

and for the second class 

B = C = —D and a cot aa = —0 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION 



41 



ENERGY LEVELS 

The energy levels are found from a numerical or graphical solution of 
Eqs. (9.6) and (9.7) with the definitions for a and given in Eqs. (9.2) 
and (9.3). A simple graphical method for effecting this solution is 
described here, since it shows quite clearly the way in which the number 
of discrete levels depends on V and a. We put £ = aa, t\ = /3a, whence 
Eq. (9.7) becomes £ tan £ = v, with 

Since £ and t\ are restricted to positive values, the energy levels may be 
found in this case from the intersections in the first quadrant of the curve 
of £ tan £ plotted against £, with the circle of known radius (2?nF a 2 /^ 2 )*. 
The construction is drawn in Fig. 8 for three values of F a 2 ; for each of 
the two smaller of these values there is one solution of Eq. (9.7) and for 
the largest there are two. 

Figure 9 is a similar construction for the solution of Eq. (9.6) in 
which the energy levels are obtained from the intersections of the same 
circles with the curve of — £ cot £ in the first quadrant. The smallest 
value of Voa 2 gives no solution, and the two larger values each give one. 
Thus the three increasing values of F a 2 give altogether one, two, and 
three energy levels, respectively. 

























V 


= |tan 


il 










aU 




! 1 




























i-t y 


,.« 2 = L 


'2m\ 










V a 2 = 


Wl I 
Im J 
























I \ 


' a 2 = 4 


ij2m 































I 



Fig. 8 Graphical solution of Eq. (9.7) for three values of Voa 2 ; the vertical dashed 
lines are the first two asymptotes of v = £ tan £• 



42 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



^ 


























V 


i 2 = 12 - 


!m 














*&gt; 




~¥ua?— « 


■l* 2 






















4 2m 
















1 






-^2 




~pi~= 


-$cot£ 








1 




-^ 


V a2 = 


2m 












i,= - 


Icotjt 


0' 




\ 
















1 



Fig. 9 Graphical solution of Eq. (9.6) for three values of F c a 2 ; the vertical 
dashed line is the first asymptote of ?? = — £ cot £. 



It is clear from Figs. 8 and 9 that, for a given particle mass, the 
energy levels depend on the parameters of the potential energy through 
the combination V a 2 . For 7 a 2 between zero and T 2 h 2 /8m, there is just 
one energy level of the first class; for V a 2 between Tr 2 h 2 /8m and four times 
this value, there is one energy level of each class, or two altogether. As 
Voa 2 increases, energy levels appear successively, first of one class and then 
of the other. It is not difficult to see from Eq. (9.2) that, when ordered 
according to increasing eigenvalues, the nth eigenfunction has n — 1 
nodes. 



PARITY 

It follows from the foregoing discussion that the eigenfunctions of the first 
class are even witn respect to change in sign of x [u{— x) = u(x)], whereas 
the eigenfunctions of the second class are odd [u(— x) = — u{x)]. This 
division of the eigenfunctions into even and odd types is not accidental 
and will now be shown to be a direct consequence of the fact that the 
potential energy function V(x) is symmetric about x = 0. If we change 
the sign of x in the wave equation (8.5) 

h 2 d 2 u(x) 



2m dx 2 



+ V(x)u{x) = Eu(x) 



(9-8) 



THE SCHRODINGER WAVE EQUATION « 

and ii V(—x) = V(x), we obtain 

-£^ + n*M-*) = ^(-x). 

Then u(x) and u( — x) are solutions of the same wave equation with 
the same eigenvalue E. Suppose at first that there is only one linearly 
independent eigenfunetion that corresponds to this energy level; then 
u(x) and u(— x) can differ only by a multiplicative constant: 

u(-x) = m(x) (9.9) 

Changing the sign of x in Eq. (9.9) gives u(x) = m( — x). From these 
two equations it follows at once that 

e 2 = 1 or e = ±1 

Thus all such eigenfunctions of a symmetric potential are either even or 
odd with respect to changes of sign of x. Such wave functions are said 
to have even or odd parity. 

If an eigenvalue has more than one linearly independent eigenfune- 
tion, the foregoing argument breaks down, and these eigenfunctions need 
not have a definite parity; they need not be even or odd. However, we 
can easily see that linear combinations of such eigenfunctions can be 
found such that each has even or odd parity. Suppose that an eigenfune- 
tion u(x) does not have a definite parity. It can always be written 

u(x) = u e (x) + u (x) 

where u e (x) = %[u{x) + u(—x)] is even, u {x) = i[u(x) — w(— x)] is odd, 
and u e and u are linearly independent. Then if the wave equation (9.8) 
is symmetric, we can write it as 

On changing the sign of x in Eq. (9.10), we obtain 

- » + (F - E)u - + » - &lt; y " E)u - - ° &lt;••"&gt; 

Addition and subtraction of Eqs. (9.10) and (9.11) show that u e and u 
are separately solutions of the wave equation with the same eigenvalue E. 

A SIMPLIFIED SOLUTION 

Knowledge that the solutions possess a definite parity sometimes simplifies 
the determination of the energy levels, since then we need only find the 
solution for positive x. Even solutions have zero slope and odd solutions 
have zero value at x — 0. If, for example, we wish to find the even solu- 



44 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

tions, Eqs. (9.2) and (9.3) can be replaced at once by 

u(x) = B cos ax &lt; x &lt; a 

u(x) = Ce~ px x &gt; a 

Instead of making both u and du/dx continuous at x = a, it is enough to 
make the ratio (l/u) (du/dx) continuous at x = a, since the normalizing 
constants B and C are eliminated thereby. This gives Eq. (9.7) at once. 
Similarly, the odd solutions are 

u(x) = A sin ax &lt; x &lt; a 

u(x) = Ce~ Px x &gt; a 

Then continuity of (l/u) (du/dx) at x = a immediately gives Eq. (9.6). 

PROBLEMS 

1. Use the arguments of Sec. 6 to set up a differential equation for \j/ that involves 
a second time derivative of i&gt;, in the case of a free particle. Discuss any solutions that 
this equation has that are not shared by the free-particle Schrodinger equation. 

2. Show that the free-particle one-dimensional Schrodinger wave equation (6.8) is 
invariant with respect to galilean transformations. Do this by showing that, when 
the transformation x' = x — vt, t' = t is applied, the transformed wave function 
\{/'(x',t') = f(x,t)\p{x,t) satisfies Eq. (6.8) with respect to the primed variables, where/ 
involves only x, t, h, m, and v. Find the form of /, and show that the traveling wave 
solution \l/{x,t) = Ae'&lt;- kx ~ wt '&gt; transforms as expected. 

3. How must a wave packet ^ fall off for large r in order that the volume integral 
of P and the surface integral of S n in Eq. (7.4) converge? 

4. Show directly that (p x ) is real for a wave packet. 

5. Show that for a three-dimensional wave packet 

j.(x*) = l-((xp x ) + (p x x)) 
at m 

6. Calculate the energy levels and plot the eigenfunctions for the three bound states 
in the potential of Fig. 76 when Voa 2 = GW/m. Compare with the first three states 
for the potential of Fig. 7a. 

7. Discuss the relation between the energy levels for the potential of Fig. 76 and 
those for the potential V(x) = + », x &lt; 0; V(x) = 0, &lt; x &lt; a; V(x) = V 0) x &gt; a. 

8. Show that if the potential energy V(i) is changed everywhere by a constant, 
the time-independent wave functions are unchanged. What is the effect on the 
energy eigenvalues? 



3 
Eigenf unctions and Eigenvalues 



In Chap. 2, the Schrodinger wave equation was developed and applied 
to a simple problem. Some discussion of the physical interpretation of 
the wave function was given in Sec. 7. This relied for the most part 
on the computation of average or expectation values of operators that 
represent various physical quantities. In addition, however, a position 
probability density was introduced. Thus at the present point we are 
in a position to calculate from the wave function any property that 
depends on the spatial distribution of a particle (for example, the mean- 
square deviation of its position from the average), whereas we can 
calculate only average values of operators other than position. Clearly 
what is needed to round out our interpretation of the wave function is a 
means of computing probability functions for operators in general; this 
would incidentally enable us to obtain the expressions for expectation 
values used in Sec. 7 without separate assumptions. 

In this chapter, we first set up three physical postulates from which a 
complete interpretation of the wave function can be derived, and we then 
apply them to a discussion of the total energy and momentum of a 

45 



« QUANTUM MECHANICS 

particle and to an illustrative problem. The interpretation presented in 
Sec. 7 can then be seen to be a special case of the more general treatment 
given here. 



MONTERPRETATIVE POSTULATES AND ENERGY EIGENFUNCTIONS 

We start with the wave function ^/{t,t), which is a solution of Eq. (6.16) 
and describes the motion of a particle that has mass m and potential 
energy V{x). From this wave function we wish to obtain as complete a 
description of the properties of the motion of the particle as is consistent 
with the uncertainty relations discussed in Sec. 3. 

DYNAMICAL VARIABLES AS OPERATORS 

We first postulate that each dynamical variable that relates to the motion of 
the 'particle can be represented by a linear operator. 1 The operator may be 
simply a multiplication operator such as r for the position, or it may 
be a differential operator such as — ihV for the momentum. 

With each operator can be associated a linear eigenvalue equation, 
defined near the beginning of Sec. 8. Thus with the operator 9. may be 
associated the equation 

Qv„ = ay&gt; M (10.1) 

where v„ is the eigenfunction of $2 corresponding to the eigenvalue w^. 

Our second postulate is that one or another of the eigenvalues w„ is the 
only possible result of a precise measurement of the dynamical variable repre- 
sented by fl. This implies that the eigenvalues of all operators that 
represent physically measurable quantities are real numbers. 

EXPANSION IN EIGENFUNCTIONS 

We assume that all the eigenfunctions of any dynamical variable con- 
stitute a complete set of functions in the sense that an arbitrary contin- 
uous function can be expanded in terms of them. This is a mathematical, 
not a physical, assumption and will be discussed further below in con- 
nection with energy and momentum eigenfunctions. 2 

Suppose now that a particular wave function \f/ is expanded in terms 
of the eigenfunctions u M of the operator fi. We adopt the statistical 
interpretation of ^ given at the beginning of Sec. 7, according to which 
there are a large number of identical independent regions of space, or 

1 An operator Q is linear if it satisfies the equation Q(ai^i + 02^2) = aiStyi + 02^2 
for arbitrary complex numbers &lt;n and functions ^». 

2 For a discussion of completeness, see, for example, R. Courant and D. Hilbert, 
"Methods of Mathematical Physics," vol. I, p. 369 (Interscience, New York, 1953). 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 47 

intervals of time, in each of which is a particle described by \p. We then 
make measurements of the dynamical variable represented by Q on each 
of these particles. Our third physical postulate is that the number of 
measurements that result in the eigenvalue w M is proportional to the square of 
the magnitude of the coefficient of v M in the expansion of \p. This postulate, 
due to M. Born (see page 25), enables us to associate a probability func- 
tion with any dynamical variable. 1 A corollary is that we are certain 
to measure a particular eigenvalue a&gt;„ only when the wave function that 
describes the particle is the corresponding eigenf unction v„. 

Rather than develop the consequences of these postulates for an 
arbitrary operator £2, we consider here the total energy of the particle, and 
in Sec. 11 the momentum. Most of the results obtained are readily 
applicable to other physical operators. 

THE TOTAL-ENERGY OPERATOR 

According to the uncertainty relation (3.3), a precise measurement of the 
total energy of a particle cannot be made in a finite length of time. Thus 
if the total energy is to have a definite value, it is essential that the 
potential energy V(t) be independent of the time. Then the operator 
— (h 2 /2m)V 2 + V(t), which was shown in Sec. 8 to be equivalent to the 
total-energy operator ih(d/dt), has eigenf unctions w(r) that need not 
involve the time. The energy-eigenvalue equation is Eq. (8.2), 

[ " £ V2 + F(r) ] Ue(t) = Eu 'to W.2) 

where the eigenf unction u E (t) corresponds to the eigenvalue E and obeys 
the boundary and continuity conditions of Sec. 8. 

As discussed in Sec. 8, the energy eigenfunctions can be divided into 
two classes: those which are well localized and are associated with discrete 
eigenvalues and those which remain finite at great distances and possess 
a continuous range of eigenvalues. 

NORMALIZATION IN A BOX 

It is often desirable to be able to treat these two classes on the same basis; 
this can be accomplished by enclosing the particle under investigation 
in a box of arbitrarily large but finite volume. The simplest physical 
situation to which this approach is applicable is one in which the walls of 
the box are perfectly rigid, so that, as shown in Sec. 8, the wave function 
vanishes there. Then the discussion of Sec. 8 shows that all the eigen- 

1 An alternative deterministic interpretation in terms of "hidden variables" rather 
than the dynamical variables, which has not been widely accepted, has been proposed 
by D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166, 180 (1952). See also J. S. Bell, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 
447 (1966); D. Bohm and J. Bub, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 453, 470 (1966). 



48 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

values are discrete. If the box is large in comparison with the dimensions 
of physical interest in the problem, the eigenvalues that were discrete in 
the absence of the box are practically unaffected, since before the walls 
were introduced the wave functions were extremely small there. Also, 
the eigenvalues that were continuously distributed in the absence of the 
box are very closely spaced; this is shown explicitly for a free particle in 
Sec. 11. 

It is more convenient to assume that the wave functions obey -peri- 
odic boundary conditions at the walls of the box than that they vanish 
there, since it is then possible to get a simpler description of the momen- 
tum eigenf unctions (see Sec. 11). We choose the finite region to be a cube 
of edge length L centered at the origin and require each wave function 
to have the same value at corresponding points of opposite faces of the 
cube, and the same derivative normal to the wall. These boundary 
conditions make the otherwise continuous eigenvalues discrete, since 
the phase of the eigenfunction at great distances is no longer arbitrary 
[see the discussion of Eq. (8.6)]. As with the rigid-walled box, the pres- 
ence of the walls has a negligible effect apart from imparting discreteness 
to the otherwise continuous eigenvalues and providing a finite volume in 
which these wave functions can be normalized; we shall continue to use 
the word "continuous" to describe these functions, even when box 
normalization is used. 

ORTHONORMALITY OF ENERGY EIGENFUNCTIONS 

The integral /|w B (r)| 2 dh, which converges in any case for the discrete set 
of eigenfunctions, converges for all eigenfunctions when they are nor- 
malized in the box of finite volume L 3 . The coefficient of u E can then be 
chosen so that this integral is equal to unity, and the u E {t) are normalized. 
We now show that the eigenfunctions corresponding to two different 
eigenvalues E and E' are orthogonal, that is, that the integral of the 
product of one of them and the complex conjugate of the other over the 
common domain of the functions is zero. From Eq. (10.2) we have that 
u* E -(r) satisfies the equation (where V is again assumed to be real) 

[ ~ 2^ V2 + V(l) ] U * E ' (T) = E ' U * E ' (T) (10 ' 3) 

In accordance with our physical interpretation, we have assumed that E' 
is real; this is verified below. We multiply Eq. (10.2) by u E &gt; and Eq. 
(10.3) by u E , integrate over the volume L 3 , and take the difference between 
the two resulting equations. The V terms cancel and leave 

_ *!. f (u*,V*u E - u E V*u*,) dh = (E - E') f u*,u E d 3 r (10.4) 
Zm J J 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 49 

The integral on the left side of Eq. (10.4) can be transformed by 
Green's theorem into a surface integral over the surface A of the cube : 

f (u%,V*u s - u E V 2 u E .) d 3 r = j V • (u%&gt;Vue - u E Vu* E ) dh 

= J A (ul'Vus - u E Vu E &gt;) n dA (10.5) 

where the subscript n designates the component of the vector in the 
direction of the outward normal to the element of area dA. Since the 
imposition of periodic boundary conditions gives each wave function and 
its normal derivative the same values at corresponding points of opposite 
faces of the cube, the outward normal derivative has opposite signs on 
opposite faces, and the surface integral in (10.5) vanishes. Then Eq. 
(10.4) tells us that, if E j&amp; E', u E and u E &gt; are orthogonal. 1 

An energy eigenvalue E is said to be degenerate when two or more 
linearly independent eigenfunctions Ui, w 2 , . . . correspond to it. 
Orthogonal linear combinations of degenerate eigenfunctions can be 
found in many different ways. For example, u a = OiWi + a 2 u 2 can be 
made orthogonal to Wi by choosing the constant coefficients a,\ and a* 
such that 

Oi _ _ fu* u 2 d 3 r 

at ~ /|wi| 2 dh 

This choice does not interfere with the normalization of u a , and u a is still 
an energy eigenf unction with the eigenvalue E. Evidently the choice 
of orthogonal linear combinations is not unique. By an extension of 
this procedure, all the energy eigenfunctions can be made orthogonal to 
each other even though some of the eigenvalues are degenerate. 

Such a set of eigenfunctions, each of which is normalized and 
orthogonal to each of the others, is called an orthonormal set of functions. 
We specify an orthonormal set of nondegenerate energy eigenfunctions 
by the relation 

Ju%.(t)u e (t) d 3 r = d BS &gt; (10.6) 

where d E E' is the symmetric Kronecker 8 symbol that equals unity if 
E = E' and is zero otherwise. If there is degeneracy, Eq. (10.6) must 
be replaced by 

Jw£v(r)ujr.(r) d*r = h EE , 8, s , (10.7) 

1 It is apparent that this proof of orthogonality can be applied to a discrete set of 
eigenfunctions even though the box is not introduced, since the u's vanish rapidly 
at great distances and the surface integral, which is then over a sphere of infinite 
radius, is zero. The continuous set of energy eigenfunctions can also be treated 
without using the box normalization (as is the continuous set of momentum eigen- 
functions in Sec. 11). 



50 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

where the index s distinguishes between orthogonal degenerate eigen- 
functions. It is often convenient to omit explicit mention of s and use 
Eq. (10.6) for degenerate situations as well, in which case the index s 
is implied. 

REALITY OF THE ENERGY EIGENVALUES 

We can now see directly that E is a real number, as has been assumed. 
We multiply Eq. (10.2) by w|(r) and integrate over the box of volume L 3 . 
If Us is normalized, the result is 

E = ~ 2^ / u *e VHs dh + / V ( T )M 2 d * r 

which may be expressed in terms of expectation values as (l/2m)(p 2 ) + (V). 

The second term (V) is real since its integrand is real. The first 

term can be shown explicitly to be real by means of a partial integration: 

- f u* E V 2 u E d 3 r = f (Vu E ) • (Vu E ) d 3 r - f A u* E (Vu E )n dA 

The volume integral is evidently real, and the surface integral [like that 
in Eq. (10.5)] vanishes because of the periodic boundary conditions at the 
walls of the box. It is interesting to note that (p 2 ) cannot be negative. 



EXPANSION IN ENERGY EIGENFUNCTIONS 

As mentioned near the beginning of this section, we make the mathe- 
matical assumption that all the eigenf unctions ue(t) of the total-energy 
operator constitute a complete set of functions in the sense that an arbi- 
trary continuous function can be expanded in terms of them. Then, if 
we have any wave function ^(r) at a particular instant of time that is 
normalized in the box L 3 and obeys periodic boundary conditions at the 
walls, the assumed existence of the expansion 

*(r) = J A b u e (t) (10.8) 

E 

makes it possible to find unique coefficients Ab that do not depend on r. 

The coefficients in the expansion (10.8) can be determined by 

multiplying both sides by u E &gt; and integrating over the box. We assume 

that the order of } and / d 3 r can be reversed 1 and obtain 

1 The propriety of changing the order of summations and integrations must in prin- 
ciple be investigated separately in each case. The mathematical considerations 
entailed are beyond the scope of this book, and we shall always assume that such inter- 
changes are permissible in situations of physical interest. 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 51 

f i4/(r)^(r) d*r = £ A E j u E ,{x)u E {t) d 3 r = £ A B 8 EE , = Ag. 

E E 

(10.9) 
with the help of Eq. (10.6) or (10.7). 

THE CLOSURE PROPERTY 

Substitution of the expression (10.9) for A E back into Eq. (10.8) gives 
*(r) = ^ [/ *4( r 'W) d3r '] Mr) 

E 

which we rearrange to give 

*(r) = / +&lt;f) [2 u* b (t')u e (t)] d*r' (10.10) 

E 

Since ^(r) is an arbitrary continuous function of r, Eq. (10.10) implies 
that the bracketed part of the integrand vanishes unless r' = r, since 
otherwise the value of ^ at the point r given by Eq. (10.10) would change 
when the values of ^ at other points r' ?± r are changed, and this is con- 
trary to the assumption that \f/ can have an arbitrary form. Moreover, 
the integral of the term in brackets must be unity when the volume of 
integration includes the point r' = r. We conclude therefore that 

J u* e (t')u e {t) = r' ?* r 

E (10.11) 

/ 2 M £( r &gt;*(r) dV = l 

E 

if the volume of integration includes the point r' = r. 

Equations (10.11) describe the closure property of the orthonormal 
set of functions u E (r) and are seen to follow directly from their complete- 
ness as expressed by Eq. (10.8), whether or not they happen to be energy 
eigenf unctions. 

PROBABILITY FUNCTION AND EXPECTATION VALUE 

The second and third physical postulates presented at the beginning of 
this section state that the energy eigenvalues are the only possible results 
of precise measurement of the total energy and that the probability of 
finding a particular value E when the particle is described by the wave 
function ^(r) is proportional to \A E \ l . It is easily seen that the pro- 



52 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

portionality factor is unity, because if we put for the energy probability 
function 

P(E) = \A E \ 2 (10.12) 

we see that P(E) sums to unity: 

£ P(E) =2f u e(*)*W dH f u E {r')+*(r') dV 

E E 

= Jf **(r')*(r) [£ u E (r)u B (r')] dH dV 

E 

= f \f(r)\ 2 d 3 r = 1 

since i&gt; is normalized; use has been made here of Eqs. (10.11). 

We can also compute the average or expectation value of the energy 
from the probability function: 

{E, = ^ Ep ( E ) = J / Eu E (T)+(r) d*r f u b (i')^*(t') dV (10.13) 

E E 

If we substitute for Eu* E (r) from Eq. (10.3), the first integral in Eq. (10.13) 
can be integrated twice by parts as follows: 

/ Eu*(t)+(x) dh = f +(r) T - $L V 2 + V(t) j u*(r) dh 

= f u*{t) [ - ^ V^ + V(r) j *(r) d'r 

The two surface integrals that result from the partial integrations vanish 
because of the periodic boundary conditions on u E and \f/. Thus, with 
the help of Eqs. (10.11), Eq. (10.13) becomes 

(E) = 2f u*(t) \ - ^ V* + F(r) 1 *(r) dh f u e (t')+*(t') dV 
= //V(f) {[" H V2 + ^(r)]*(r)} [^(r^OO ]d 3 rdV 

= / **(r) [" - ~ V 2 + F(r)j *(r) d*r (10.14) 

The result embodied in Eq. (10.14) confirms the supposition made 
in Sec. 7 that the expectation value of an operator is to be calculated by 
inserting the operator between ^*(r) and ^(r), so that it operates just on 
the latter, and then integrating over r. 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 53 

GENERAL SOLUTION OF THE SCHRODINGER EQUATION 

If the potential energy V(t) is independent of t and we know the solution 
of the Schrodinger equation (6.16) at a particular time, we can write a 
formal expression for the solution at any time. We expand ^(r,&lt;) in 
energy eigenfunctions at the time t, in which case the expansion coeffi- 
cients depend on the time. 

,Kr,0 = 7 A E (t)u E (r) A E (t) = f u* E (r)4,(T,t) d'r (10.15) 

Substitution of Eq. (10.15) into the wave equation (6.16) gives 

ih ^ Mr) j t A B (t) = £ A E (t)Eu E (x) (10.16) 

E E 

Because of the orthonormality of the u E , Eq. (10.16) is equivalent to 

ih j t A E (t) = EA E (t) 

which may be integrated at once to give 

A E {t) = l JS (io)e- iB( '-''"* (10.17) 

Note that P(E) = \A E (t)\ 2 = \A E (t )\ 2 is constant in time. 

Thus, if $(t,t) is known at the time t = t , the solution at any time t 
is given in terms of Eqs. (10.15) and (10.17) : 

*(r,0 = J A E {h)e- iE ^-^i h u E (r) 

E (10.18) 

A E (t ) = /z4(r')*(r',* ) dV 
or 

*(r,0 = J [£ u E (T')u E {T)e- iE «-&lt;°'&gt;i*'] +(T',t ) d'r' (10.19) 

E 

The solution (10.18) is a linear combination of the separated solutions 
(8.3) obtained earlier. 

11DMOMENTUM EIGENFUNCTIONS 

The eigenfunctions of the linear momentum operator — ihV provide a 
second instructive example of the application of the general ideas devel- 
oped at the beginning of the preceding section. They also are of con- 
siderable usefulness in solving problems of physical interest. 

FORM OF THE EIGENFUNCTIONS 

The momentum eigenfunctions are solutions of the three eigenvalue 
equations 

-ihVu p (r) = pw p (r) (11.1) 



54 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

or 

f) ft 

~ ih te U p( T ) = V*u v (x) -ih — Uvir) = p„u p (r) 

They have the form 

«,(r) = Cexp^^ 

where C is a normalization constant. 

It is convenient, as in Sec. 6, to change from the momentum vector 
p to the propagation vector k = p/h and to rewrite the momentum 
eigenfunctions 

w k (r) = Cexp(«k&gt;r) (11.2) 

These are eigenfunctions of the momentum operator with the eigen- 
values hk. 

BOX NORMALIZATION 

As with the energy eigenfunctions discussed in Sec. 10, we can restrict 
the domain of the u k (t) to an arbitrarily large but finite cubical box of 
volume L 3 centered at the origin, at the walls of which the functions obey 
periodic boundary conditions. Then u± is normalized if C = L~*. Also, 
k is no longer an arbitrary real vector; its components are restricted to 
the values 

where n x , n yi and n t are positive or negative integers or zero. The spacing 
of neighboring k vectors and of their energy eigenvalues h 2 k 2 /2m can be 
made as small as desired by making L sufficiently large. It is always 
assumed that the limit L — &gt; &lt;» is taken at the end of the calculation. 

It is interesting to note that the momentum eigenfunctions (11.2) 
cannot exist within a box that has perfectly rigid walls, since these eigen- 
functions do not vanish anywhere. This is analogous to the classical 
situation in which the momentum of a particle that is reflected from a 
rigid wall is not conserved. On the other hand, the cubical box with 
periodic boundary conditions is equivalent to a situation in which the 
entire infinite space is divided into adjacent cubes and all wave func- 
tions are periodic throughout space with the period L along each of the 
three cartesian axes. If the periodicity of the space is carried over to 
the analogous classical situation, a particle passing through a wall would 



/ 



EIGENFU NOTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 55 

be equivalent to one that strikes that wall and appears at the correspond- 
ing point of the opposite wall with its momentum vector unchanged. 
The orthonormality of the momentum eigenfunctions 

w k (r) = L-i exp (tk • r) (11.4) 

is readily established. For integration over the volume L s 

u* (r)wk(r) d a r 

= _J_ f iL e^-^'dx f iL ««*.-'.&gt;» dy f iL e«*.-u« dz 

L 3 J-\L J-IL a J-\L 

— 8 kx i t 8k v i y Sk.i, = 5ki (11-5) 

where the 5's are Kronecker 8 symbols and use is made of Eqs. (11.3). 
Orthogonality could also have been shown by the more general method 
used in Sec. 10 for the energy eigenfunctions [see Eq. (10.4)]. 

THE DIRAC S FUNCTION 

It was stated in Sec. 10 that continuous sets of eigenfunctions can be 
handled without introducing the box with periodic boundary conditions 
(which has the effect of making the set discrete with an arbitrarily small 
spacing of eigenvalues) . This can be shown explicitly for the momentum 
eigenfunctions with the help of the Dirac 5 function, 1 which can be 
denned by the relations 

8(x) =0 if x ^ / 8(x) dx = 1 (11.6) 

where the region of integration includes the point x = 0. An equivalent 
definition is that, for an arbitrary function f(x) that is continuous at 
x = 0, the equation 

!f(x) «(») dx = /(0) (11.7) 

is valid, where again the integration includes the point x = 0. 

It is apparent from a comparison of Eqs. (11.6) and (10.11), or of 
Eqs. (11.7) and (10.10), that the bracketed quantity in Eq. (10.10) can 
be expressed in terms of 5 functions: 

X t4(r&gt;*(r) = 8(x - z') 8(y - y') 8(z - z') = S*(r - r') (11.8) 

E 

Comparison of Eqs. (11.8) and (10.6) shows that the closure property is a 
kind of orthonormality of the eigenfunctions with respect to summation 
over the eigenvalues. 

1 P. A. M. Dirac, "The Principles of Quantum Mechanics," 4th ed., sec. 15 (Oxford, 
New York, 1958). 



56 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

A REPRESENTATION OF THE S FUNCTION 

The definition (11.6) or (11.7) shows that 8(x) is an exceedingly singular 
function. 1 It may be thought of qualitatively as being zero everywhere 
except at x = and being so large there that the area between it and the 
x axis is finite and equal to unity. More formally, it can be represented in 
a number of different ways as the limit of a sequence of analytic functions. 
A particular representation that is quite useful involves (sin gx)/wx 
as a function of x, where g is a positive real number. This has the value 
q/t at x = 0, oscillates with decreasing amplitude and with period 2ir/g 
as \x\ increases, and has unit integral from x = — » tos = +°o indepen- 
dently of the value of g. Thus the limit of this function as g — &gt; °o has all 
the properties of the 8 function: It becomes infinitely large at x = 0, 
it has unit integral, and the infinitely rapid oscillations as \x\ increases 
mean that the entire contribution to an integral containing this function 
comes from the infinitesimal neighborhood of x = 0. We can therefore 
put 

S( X ) = i im S 2HJ? (1L9) 

„_*» TTX V ' 



NORMALIZATION IN TERMS OF THE 5 FUNCTION 

The representation (11.9) of the 5 function can be used to set up an 
orthonormality integral like that given in Eq. (11.5), where now we do 
not impose the box normalization but allow the momentum eigenfunc- 
tions to have the form (11.2) over all space with all real vectors k. The 
integral Jw*(r)w k (r) d 3 r is the product of three integrals, each of which 
can be expressed in terms of a 8 function: 



f°° e i(k x -l x )x^ x = li m f° e i(k t -l x )x^ x 
J-™ ,7-&gt;oo J-0 

2 sin g(k x — l x ) 



= Hm k - I 
= 2ir8(k x - l x ) (11.10) 

Thus the momentum eigenfunctions in infinite space can be written 

u k (t) = (87T 3 )-* exp (*k • r) (11.11) 

1 A rigorous mathematical basis has been provided for the S function by L. Schwartz. 
It may be thought of as a linear functional that operates on a set of sufficiently well- 
behaved test functions; thus the left side of Eq. (11.7) could be written «[/]. For 
detailed discussions, see M. J. Lighthill, "Introduction to Fourier Analysis and Gener- 
alized Functions" (Cambridge, New York, 1958); A. Messiah, "Quantum Mechanics," 
vol. I, App. A (Interscience, New York, 1961). 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 57 

in which case the orthonormality relation becomes 

Jtt*(r)uk(r) dh = 8(k x - l x ) 8(k u - /„) 8(k t - Q = 8 3 (k - 1) 

(11.12) 

It will be shown in Sec. 12 that the box and 5-f unction normalizations 
of the momentum eigenfunctions give the same final result in a typical 
problem. 

SOME PROPERTIES OF THE S FUNCTION 

It is important to note that, because of its singular character, the 8 
function cannot be the end result of a calculation and has meaning only 
so long as a subsequent integration over its argument is carried out. 
With this understanding we can write some relations between 5 functions. 1 

8(x) = 8(-x) 

8'(x) = -5'(-a0 

x 8(x) = 

x8'(x) = -8(x) (11.13) 

8(ax) = or 1 8(x) a &gt; 

8(x* - a 2 ) = (2a)- l [8(x - a) + 8(x + a)] a &gt; 

/ 8(a — x) 8(x — b) dx = 8(a — b) 

f(x) 8(x - a) = /(a) 8(x - a) 

Here, a prime denotes differentiation with respect to the argument. 

Each of the first six of these equations can be established by multi- 
plying both sides by a continuous, diff erentiable function f(x) and inte- 
grating over x. For example, the fourth of Eqs. (11.13) gives 

J f(x)x 8'{x) dx= - j 8(x) ^ [xf(x)] dx 



= - / Kx)[f(x) +xf'(x)] dx= - f f(x) 8(x) dx 



where the boundary terms that result from the partial integration vanish. 
Thus x8'(x) has the same effect when it is a factor in an integrand as has 
— 8(x). Similarly the seventh of Eqs. (11.13) means that the two sides 
give the same result when multiplied by /(a) or f(b) and integrated over a 
or b. The last equation is verified by integrating both sides over either 
x or a. 

CLOSURE 

The closure property of the momentum eigenfunctions, with both box 
and 5-function normalization, can be established without the help of the 

1 Dirac, op. cit., p. 60. 



58 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

completeness assumption that was made in Sec. 10 for the energy eigen- 
functions. With box normalization, the expression analogous to the left 
side of Eq. (11.8) is 

00 00 oo 

V Wk(r')Wk(r) = IT 3 Y V V e 2'iln z (x-x')+n y C V -y')+n,( g -z')]IL 

This is readily evaluated in the limit of large L, in which case the sum- 
mand changes by a negligible amount as each n changes by one unit. 

oo 

We can then regard n x as a continuous variable and replace Y by 

r oo /■ n x = — oo 

/_«, dn * = ( L / 2ir ) J2 m dk *- We tnus obtain 

k 

(87T 3 )- 1 J* m J' m f~ m e&lt;[*.(— *')+»,(ir-»')+*.(^^)] dk x dk y dk t 

= 6(z - x') 8(y - y') 8(z - z') = S 3 (r - r') (11.14) 

on making use of Eq. (11.10). 

A similar calculation can be carried through, using the 5-function 
normalization, in which case we obtain from Eqs. (11.11) and (11.10) 

JitkOrOttkCr) d 3 k = JJ/^(r')M k (r) dk x dk y dk t = S 3 (r - r') (11.15) 

The closure relation (11.14) or (11.15) shows that the momentum 
eigenfunctions are orthonormal with respect to summation or integration 
over the eigenvalue k as well as with respect to integration over the 
position vector r. 

EXPANSION IN MOMENTUM EIGENFUNCTIONS 

An arbitrary continuous function ^(r) can be written in terms of the 8 
function as 

*(r) = J&gt;(r') 3 3 (r - r') dV (11.16) 

If we substitute the left side of Eq. (11.14) in place of 5 3 (r — r') in Eq. 
(11.16), we obtain 

*(r) = / *(r') ^ w£(r&gt;k(r) dh' = £ ^k(r) 

k k (11.17) 

A k = / t£(rW) d¥ 

Similarly, if we substitute for 5 3 (r — r') from Eq. (11.15), we obtain 

*(r) = /^(r')/wk(r')wk(r) d*k dV = JA k u k (r) d 3 k (11.18) 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 59 

with the same expression for A k . Equations (11.17) and (11.18) show 
that it is possible to expand an arbitrary function in momentum eigen- 
f unctions that are normalized either in a box or by means of 8 functions. 1 

PROBABILITY FUNCTION AND EXPECTATION VALUE 

The momentum probability function associated with a normalized wave 
function ^(r) is proportional to |A k | 2 . The proportionality factor is 
unity, since if we put 

P(k) = |il k |« (11.19) 

it is easily shown in analogy with the summation of Eq. (10.12) that 

J P(k) = 1 and j P(k) d 3 k = 1 (11.20) 

k 

for the box and 5-function normalization, respectively. 

The expectation value of the momentum when box normalization 
is used is . 

&lt;p&gt; = h y kP(k) = h y f ktt£(r),Kr) d 3 r f u k (r')iA*(r') dY (11.21) 

k k 

From the complex conjugate of Eq. (11.2), we can replace kw k (r) by 
t'Vw k (r). Then the first integral in Eq. (11.21) can be integrated by 
parts, and the surface integral vanishes because of the periodic boundary 
conditions on \[/ and w k . Thus, with the help of Eq. (11.14), Eq. (11.21) 
becomes 

&lt;p&gt; = -ih ^ f &lt;(i)V+(t) d 3 r J w k (r')**(r') dV 

k 

= -ih Jj ^*(r')[V^(r)] 6 3 (r - r') d 3 r d 3 r' 

= -ih j ^*(r)V^(r) d 3 r (11.22) 

This is in agreement with the second of Eqs. (7.8). 

When 5-function normalization is used, the details of the calculation 
are very similar to those given above, except that the surface integral 
that results from the partial integration is over a sphere of infinite radius ; 
it is zero because \p becomes vanishingly small at great distances. This is 
consistent with the supposition that \p is normalized; otherwise neither 
/P(k) d 3 k nor (p) have any physical meaning. The result of the calcula- 
tion in this case is the same as Eqs. (11.22) and (7.8). 

1 These results, although not rigorously established here, are equivalent to the mathe- 
matical theorems on the expansibility of functions in Fourier series and Fourier 
integrals. 



«&gt; QUANTUM MECHANICS 

12 □ MOTION OF A FREE WAVE PACKET IN ONE DIMENSION 

The motion of a free particle (no external forces) in one dimension is 
described by the Schrodinger wave equation (6.8). The study of this 
motion provides an interesting application of the expansion techniques 
developed in Sees. 10 and 11. As a first step, we find the minimum value 
of the uncertainty product given in Eq. (3.1) and the possible forms of 
the one-dimensional wave packet that correspond to it, all at a definite 
instant of time. The structure of this minimum packet is the same 
whether or not the particle is free, since this form can be regarded simply 
as an initial condition on the solution of the Schrodinger equation for 
any V. However, the analytical work involved in finding ^ at other 
times is especially simple in the force-free case. 

THE MINIMUM UNCERTAINTY PRODUCT 1 

In order to find the minimum value for the uncertainty product Ax • Ap, 
we must first define what we mean by Ax and Ap. Although many 
expressions are possible, the simplest to handle analytically is the root- 
mean-square deviation from the mean, where the word "mean" implies 
the expectation value of Sec. 7. 2 

(Ax) 2 = ((x - (x)) 2 ) = &lt;x 2 ) - (2x(x)) + «:r) 2 ) = (x 2 ) - &lt;x&gt; 2 

(Ap) 2 = ((p - &lt;p» 2 &gt; = &lt;p 2 &gt; - (pY (12 - 1} 

Here the equalities follow directly from the general definition of expecta- 
tion value given in Sec. 7. If now we put 



a = x — 
then 



&lt;*&gt; ^ p -&lt; p &gt; --*(£-(£)) &lt; i2 - 2 &gt; 



(Ax) 2 (Ap) 2 = J* m ^*«V dx f~ m f*0 2 f dx 

= ]'„ («***) MO dx f~ m OV*)G8*) dx (12.3) 

The transformation of the a integral in Eq. (12.3) is obvious; the similar 
transformation of the /3 integral follows from a partial integration when 
we remember that ^ is a normalized wave packet, which vanishes at 

x = ± oo. 

1 W. Heisenberg, "The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory," pp. 17-19 
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1930). 

* Note that Ax and Ap are each calculated separately from ^. We do not consider 
the possible existence of a "joint probability distribution" for x and p; see P. Suppes, 
Phil. Sci. 28, 378 (1961). 



EIGENRJNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 61 



The inequality 

2 



/ 



V 9 S\o\*dx 



dx &gt; 



where all integrals are from x — — °° to + °° , is obviously true, and the 
equality is applicable only if / = yg, where 7 is a constant. From this 
inequality we obtain at once 

f\f\* dx f\g\* ** &gt; \tf*9dx\* 
If now we replace/ by a\p and g by /3^, Eq. (12.3) becomes 

(Ax) 2 (Ap) 2 &gt; | J" (a ***)(£*) dx\ 2 = \M*aM dx\ 2 (12.4) 

The last term in Eq. (12.4) can be written 

|J&gt;*[*(«0 - fi«) + U&lt;*(3 + fia)}+ dx\ 2 

= i|J**(«/3 - dot)* dx\ 2 + i|J&gt;*(a/3 + jSa)^ &lt;*r| 2 (12.5) 

The cross term in the product that is omitted on the right side of Eq. 
(12.5) can be seen to vanish when use is made of the relation 

U+*aM dx)* = J&gt;a*0V* dx = K/3 V)M0 dx = M*0a+ dx 

which is obtained by using partial integration and remembering that a 
is real. Now from Eq. (12.2) 



(048 - fia)f = -ih [* j| - 5£ (**)] = M (12.6) 

We thus obtain from Eqs. (12.4) to (12.6) 

(Ax) 2 (Ap) 2 &gt; \h 2 or Ax • Ap &gt; $h (12.7) 

where the equality can hold only if the second term on the right side of 
Eq. (12.5) is zero. This is the precise expression of the Heisenberg 
uncertainty relation (3.1), when the uncertainties Ax and Ap are defined 
as in Eq. (12.1). 

FORM OF THE MINIMUM PACKET 

It follows from the foregoing derivation that the minimum uncertainty 
product is attained only when two conditions are fulfilled: 

at = yP+ (12.8) 

J^*(a/8 + j8a)^dx = (12.9) 

Equations (12.8) and (12.2) give us a differential equation for ^ 

dx 



= [^&lt;*-&lt;*» + T&gt; 



62 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

which is readily integrated to give 

Hx) = N exp ^ (x - (x)) 2 + *^1 (12.10) 

where N is an arbitrary constant. 

Equation (12.9), with the help of Eq. (12.8), becomes 

which evidently requires that y be pure imaginary. Then, since we want 
Eq. (12.10) to represent a wave packet for which the integral of \\p\ 2 con- 
verges, 7 must be negative imaginary. The magnitude of the constant 
N can now be fixed by normalizing ^. 

JW&lt;&amp; = 1 

Similarly, y can be determined by requiring that 

S(x - {x)) 2 \+\ 2 dx = (Ax) 2 

The integrals are readily evaluated and lead to the normalized minimum 
wave packet 

Kx) = [2ir(A*)']-t exp [ - ( * 4 ^* 2 ))2 + ^ j (12.11) 

MOMENTUM EXPANSION COEFFICIENTS 

The one-dimensional momentum eigenf unctions analogous to Eqs. (11.4) 
and (11.11) are 

u k (x) = L-*e»» (12.12) 

for normalization in a one-dimensional "box" of length L, and 

u k (x) = (2ir)-»e*« (12.13) 

for 8-i unction normalization. Since for a free particle the wave equation 
has the simple form of Eq. (6.8) 

the momentum eigenf unctions are also eigenf unctions of the energy. 1 
Thus any solution of the wave equation can be written in a form analogous 
to Eq. (10.18), 

$(x,t) = (J or / dk ) A k e- iB ^u k (x) (12.15) 

k 

1 The converse is not necessarily true, since there are two solutions of Eq. (12.16) 
for k (positive and negative) for each value of Ek. 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 63 

where the Ak are independent of x and t; the entire time dependence is 
contained in the exponential factor. Equation (12.15) is readily verified 
to be a solution of Eq. (12.14) by direct substitution, provided that 

A - £ (12.16) 

The problem of finding the motion of a wave packet is thus resolved 
into finding the expansion coefficient A k at some particular time, say 
t = 0, and then using Eqs. (12.15) and (12.16) to find ^(x,t) at other 
times. At t = 0, the exponential factors in Eq. (12.15) are unity, and 
we may use the one-dimensional analog of the second of Eqs. (11.17) to 
find A k . 

Ak = fut(x)+(x,0) dx (12.17) 

The limits on the integral are x = i{L or 2 = ±°°, according as box 
or 5-function normalization is used. The momentum probability func- 
tion P(k) = \A k e~ iE " tlh \ 2 = \A k \ 2 is independent of the time, so that (p) 
and Ap, for example, are constants. 

CHANGE WITH TIME OF A MINIMUM PACKET 

As a simple specific example, we take ^(#,0) to have the form of Eq. 
(12.11) with (x) = (p) = 0, so that the wave packet initially is centered 
at x = and has zero average momentum. Then, using box normaliza- 
tion, Eq. (12.17) gives 

A t = [2tZ,°(A*)°]-&lt; /l^exp [- jj^p - ifcr] dx 

= [WJ «-.■«.»• (12 . 18) 

where L is assumed to be so large that the contribution to the integral 
from |a:| &gt; \L can be neglected. Substitution into Eq. (12.15) gives the 
wave function for general values of t : 

+(x,t) = V A k e- ihkti i 2m u k (x) (12.19) 



where k = 2irn/L and n takes on all positive and negative integer values 
and zero. As in Sec. 11, L may be taken arbitrarily large, n can be 
regarded as a continuous variable, and the summation replaced by jdn, 
which in turn is the same as (L/2w)jdk. Thus 



64 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The position probability density is then 



i* fe »i° = |2.[(A*)* +i ^y) 



-j 



exp — 



2[(Ax) 2 + h 2 t 2 /4m 2 (Ax) 2 ] ( 12 - 21) 



Equation (12.21) is of the same form as |^(x,0)| 2 , except that (Ax) 2 
is replaced by (Ax) 2 + ft 2 i 2 /4m 2 (Ax) 2 , which is equal to (Ax) 2 + (Ap) 2 t 2 /m 2 . 
Thus the center of the packet remains at x = while the breadth of the 
packet increases as t departs from zero in both past and future directions. 
The smaller the initial uncertainty in position, the larger the uncertainty 
in momentum and the more rapidly the packet spreads; the time-depend- 
ent part of the above expression, t(Ap)/m, is simply the distance traveled 
by a classical particle of momentum Ap in the time t. 

Use of the 5-function normalization does not alter the results of the 
foregoing calculation. The expression for Ak given in Eq. (12.18) is to 
be multiplied by (L/2w)*; in Eq. (12.19) the summation is to be replaced 
directly by jdk, thus eliminating a factor L/2ir; finally, u k in Eq. (12.19) 
is to be multiplied by (L/2ir) i . These three factors cancel, and so Eqs. 
(12.20) and (12.21) are unaffected by the choice of normalization of the 
momentum eigenf unctions. 

CLASSICAL LIMIT 

We have seen in Sec. 7 that a wave packet always moves like a classical 
particle insofar as the expectation values of its position and momentum 
are concerned. However, classical dynamics is useful as a description of 
the motion only if the spreading of the wave packet can be neglected over 
times of interest in the particular problem. 

As a simple example of the kind of parameter that indicates when the 
classical limit is realized, we consider a wave packet that corresponds to a 
classical particle moving in a circular orbit of radius a and period T. We 
shall assume that this packet is sufficiently well localized so that the 
potential energy does not vary appreciably over its dimensions. Then 
the classical theory can provide a useful description of the motion only 
if a wave packet like that discussed above spreads by an amount that is 
small in comparison with a during a time that is large in comparison 
with T. The smallest spread of a packet during a time interval of mag- 
nitude t is attained when Ax is chosen to be of order (ht/m)*. We thus 
require that (ht/m)* &lt;JC a when ty&gt; T. This condition may be simply 
expressed by saying that the angular momentum 2wina 2 /T of the particle 
must be very large in comparison with h. Thus for most atomic systems, 
where the angular momentum of each electron is of order h, a wave 
packet corresponding to a well-localized particle spreads so much in one 



EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 65 

period that this type of description of the motion is not of physical 
interest. 



PROBLEMS 

1. Given three degenerate eigenfunctions that are linearly independent although 
not necessarily orthogonal, find three linear combinations of them that are orthog- 
onal to each other and are normalized. Are the three new combinations eigen- 
functions? If so, are they degenerate? 

2. Show that so far as the one-dimensional motion of a particle is concerned, the 
functions u x &gt;(x) = S(x — x') for all real x' constitute a complete orthonormal set 
and that each of them is an eigenfunction of the position variable x with the eigen- 
value x'. Set up the position probability function and compare with that obtained 
in Sec. 7. 

3. If the potential energy V(x) in a one-dimensional problem is a monotonic 
increasing function of x and independent of the time, show that the functions uv(x) = 
(dV/dx)~l x -x&gt; S(x — x') for all real x', where V = V(x'), constitute a complete 
orthonormal set of eigenfunctions of the potential energy with eigenvalues V. Find 
the probability function for the potential energy, and show that it has the properties 
that would be expected of it. 

4. What changes are needed in the discussion of the momentum eigenfunctions 
given in Sec. 11 if the normalization is carried through in a box of rectangular parallel- 
epiped shape rather than in a box of cubical shape? 

5. Find two other representations for the Dirac 6 function like that given in Eq. (11.9). 

6. Verify each of Eqs. (11.13) involving S functions. 

7. Show that the two Eqs. (11.20) are correct: that the momentum probability 
function defined in Eqs. (11.19) and (11.17) for a normalized ^ sums or integrates to 
unity. 

8. The expression in brackets in the integrand of Eq. (10.19) enables one to calculate 
^ at time t' in terms of ^ at time t. If this expression is called iG(x',t';x,t) in the one- 
dimensional case, then rp(x',t') = ifG(x',t';x,t)i//(x,t) dx. Show that for a free particle 
in one dimension 



G n (x' t'-jrt) = — i I — I gt«(*'-*)»/«itt'-i) 



Assume that ^ has the form of the normalized minimum wave packet (12.11) at 
t = 0; use the above result to find \p and M 2 at another time I'. This Go is called the 
free-particle Green's function in one dimension (see Sec. 36). 

9. Let Mi(r) and Ui{t) be two eigenfunctions of the same hamiltonian that correspond 
to the same energy eigenvalue; they may be the same function, or they may be degen- 
erate. Show that 

fu* (r)(xp x + p x x)u t (r) d 3 r = 

where the momentum operator p x = —ih(d/dx) operates on everything to its right. 
What is the relation of this problem to Prob. 5, Chap. 2? 



4 
Discrete Eigenvalues: 
Bound States 



The formalism that was developed in Chap. 2 and elaborated in Chap. 
3 will now be applied to the explicit computation of discrete energy levels 
and the corresponding eigenf unctions. The next chapter will take up 
situations in which the energy eigenvalues are continuously distributed. 
Thus we are concerned here with bound states in which the particle is 
restrained by the external forces (potential energy) to a particular region 
of space, and in the next chapter with collision problems in which the 
particle can approach from and recede to infinite distance. 

The relatively few potential-energy functions V(t) for which analytic 
solutions of the wave equation (8.2) are possible are important beyond 
these immediate problems, since they often serve as bases for approxi- 
mate calculations on more complicated systems. 

13DLINEAR HARMONIC OSCILLATOR 

The one-dimensional motion of a point mass attracted to a fixed center 
by a force that is proportional to the displacement from that center 

66 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 67 

provides one of the fundamental problems of classical dynamics. Its 
study is important not only for itself but also because more complicated 
systems can always be analyzed in terms of normal modes of motion 
whenever the interparticle forces are linear functions of the relative dis- 
placements, and these normal modes are formally equivalent to harmonic 
oscillators. This linearity of the newtonian equations of motion means 
that the potential energy of the system is a bilinear function of the 
coordinates; since this aspect carries over into quantum mechanics, har- 
monic normal modes can again be found. Thus the one-dimensional 
harmonic oscillator is very important for the quantum-mechanical treat- 
ment of such problems as the vibrations of individual atoms in molecules 
and in crystals. It also provides the key to quantum theory of the 
electromagnetic field. The vibrations of the electromagnetic field in a 
cavity can be analyzed into harmonic normal modes, each of which has 
energy levels of the oscillator type [see Eq. (13.8)]. Excitation of a par- 
ticular mode of angular frequency &lt;*&gt; to the nth excited state means that 
the energy of the system is increased by nhw and corresponds physically 
to the addition of n photons of this frequency to the system (see Chap. 
14). 

We shall solve the oscillator problem in this section by starting with 
the Schrodinger equation. However it can also be solved by algebraic 
methods, starting with the matrix theory of Chap. 6. The importance of 
the harmonic oscillator is so great that we shall also carry through, the 
matrix solution in Sec. 25. 

ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR 

The force F — —Kx can be represented by the potential energy 
V(x) = \Kx 2 so that Eq. (8.5) becomes 

-sap + ***■»-*• &lt; 131) 

It is convenient in dealing with an equation of this type to rewrite it in 
dimensionless form. To this end we introduce a dimensionless inde- 
pendent variable £ = ax, and a dimensionless eigenvalue X, and attempt 
to put Eq. (13.1) in the form 

^ + (X - {•)« = (13.2) 

Comparison of Eqs. (13.1) and (13.2) shows that this is possible if 

4_™* . _2E/m\i _2E 

*--W X ~~h{K) ~f^ c (133) 

where co c — (K/m)* is the angular frequency of the corresponding classical 
harmonic oscillator. 



68 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The solution of Eq. (13.2) is facilitated by first examining the domi- 
nant behavior of u in the asymptotic region £ — &gt; + &lt;x&gt; . x For sufficiently 
large £ it is apparent that u(£) = £ n e ±i{ * satisfies Eq. (13.2), so far as the 
leading terms (which are of order £ z u) are concerned, when n has any 
finite value. The boundary conditions of Sec. 8 permit us to keep only 
the minus sign in the exponent. This suggests that it might be possible 
to find an exact solution of Eq. (13.2) of the form 

"(*) = H(H)e-W (13.4) 

where H(£) is a polynomial of finite order in £. Substitution of Eq. 
(13.4) into Eq. (13.2) gives as the equation for H(£) 

H" - 2itH' + (X - l)ff = (13.5) 

where primes denote differentiation with respect to £. 

ENERGY LEVELS 

We now find a solution for H in the form 

#(£) = e(a + arf + a 2 £ 2 + • • • ) o ^ s &gt; (13.6) 

This is necessarily finite for £ = 0. Equation (13.5) is to be valid for all 
values of £, so that, when Eq. (13.6) is substituted into it, the coefficient 
of each power of £ can be equated to zero. 

s(s — l)ao = 

(s + l)sai = 

(« + 2)(* + Do, - (2s + 1 - X)a = 

(s + 3)(s + 2)a 3 - (2s + 3 - X)a x = 

(« + » + 2)(s + v + l)a„ +2 - (2s + 2v + 1 - \)a, = 

where v is an integer. Since a cannot be zero, the first of Eqs. (13.7) 
tells us that a = or s = 1. The second equation tells us that s = 0, 
or fli = 0, or both. Then the third equation gives us a^ in terms of a , 
the fourth gives us a 3 in terms of a h and the general equation gives us 
a„ +2 in terms of a„. 

The discussion of parity in Sec. 9 shows that w(£), and hence also 
H(£), can be chosen to be either even or odd in £. It then follows from 
Eq. (13.6) that ai and all the other odd-subscript coefficients are zero. 
The wave function is then even or odd according as s = or s = 1. 

It follows from Eqs. (13.7) that the presence in the series (13.6) of 
a finite or an infinite number of terms depends on the choice of s and the 

1 We follow the polynomial method of A. Sommerfeld, "Wave Mechanics," p. 11 
(Dutton, New York, 1929). 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES * 9 

eigenvalue X. If the series does not terminate, its dominant asymptotic 
behavior can be inferred from the coefficients of its high terms : 

a„+2 2 



This ratio is the same as that of the series for i n e&amp; with any finite value of 
n. Equation (13.4) shows that this behavior for H violates the boundary 
conditions on u for large |£|. 

Thus the series (13.6) must terminate. This means that 

X = 2s + 2v + 1 

v must be an even integer, since a 9^ and otherwise the even-subscript 
terms would form an infinite series. The index s can still be either or 
1, and corresponding to these two values X is equal to 2v + 1 or 2v + 3, 
where v is an even integer. We may express both cases in terms of a 
quantum number n : 

X = 2n + 1 E n = (n + $)hu e n = 0, 1, 2, . . . (13.8) 

It follows from Eqs. (13.8) and (13.7) that n is the highest value of 
s + v in the series (13.6) for H. If we denote the corresponding poly- 
nomial by #„(£), we see that H n is of degree n in £ and is wholly even or 
odd according as n is even or odd. Since tr^ is even and has no nodes, 
the corresponding eigenf unction u„(£) has the parity of n and has n nodes. 

ZERO-POINT ENERGY 

The infinite sequence of energy levels (13.8) has the equal spacing postu- 
lated in 1900 by Planck, which is in agreement with the quantization 
rules of the old quantum theory. However, the finite value of the ground- 
state energy level %hw e , which is called the zero-point energy, is character- 
istic of the quantum mechanics and is related to the uncertainty principle 
in the same manner as is the .finite lowest energy level for the square 
well with perfectly rigid walls (Sec. 9). The total energy is of order 
(Ap) 2 /m + K(Ax) 2 , where Ap and Ax are measures of the spreads in 
momentum and position, as defined in Sec. 12; if this is minimized, taking 
account of the uncertainty relation (3.1), it is easily seen that the mini- 
mum Ap is of order (Kmh*)*, so that the minimum total energy is of 
order h{K/m)^ or hu) c - 

HERMITE POLYNOMIALS 

The polynomial of order n that has the parity of n and is a solution of 
Eq. (13.5) with X = 2n + 1 

H » _ 2l-H' n + 2nH n = (13.9) 



70 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

is called the nth Hermite polynomial #„(£). It is clear from the fore- 
going solution of Eq. (13.5) that these conditions define H„ uniquely 
except for an arbitrary multiplying constant. It is not necessary, then, 
to use the recursion relations (13.7) to study the detailed properties of 
the H n if some other formulation of them can be found that is consistent 
with these conditions. A far more convenient formulation is actually 
available, which expresses the H n in terms of a generating function S(£,s). 



I 



Hn(£) „ 



If the exponential in Eq. (13.10) is expanded out in powers of s and £, it is 
seen that a given power of s is associated only with powers of £ that are 
equal to that power or less than it by an even integer. Thus H n (£) 
defined in this way is a polynomial of order n that has the parity of n. 
To show that this H n satisfies the differential equation (13.9), we 
differentiate both sides of Eq. (13.10) first with respect to £ and then with 
respect to s. 

n n 

« = (-2, + 2 { )e-«. ( = I &lt;-» + 2t)«- Bm(&amp; 

n 

-I 



(n-1)! 



#»(£) 



Equating equal powers of s in the sums of these two equations gives, 
respectively, 

H' n = 2nH n _ 1 

H n+1 = 2£H n - 2n# n _ x (1311) 

The lowest-order differential equation involving only H n that can be 
constructed from Eqs. (13.11) is easily seen to be Eq. (13.9). Thus the 
#„(£) given by Eq. (13.10) are the Hermite polynomials. 

The relations (13.11) may be used for the calculation of the H n and 
their derivatives, or an explicit expression obtainable directly from the 
generating function may be used. If S(£,s) is differentiated n times with 
respect to s and s is then set equal to 0, Eq. (13.10) shows that the result 
is simply #„(£). Now for any function of the form/(s — £) it is apparent 
that 

ds d£ 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 71 

Thus 

as™ ds» e ^ ; df» 

This gives an expression for the nth Hermite polynomial: 

HniQ = (-DvP^«-P (13.12) 

The first three polynomials calculated from Eq. (13.12) are 
Ho(S) = 1 #i(£) = 2? # 2 (|) = 4£ 2 - 2 

HARMONIC-OSCILLATOR WAVE FUNCTIONS 

The generating function is also useful for the calculation of integrals 
involving the harmonic-oscillator wave functions (13.4): 

Un(x) = N n H n (ax)e-i" ,x ' (13.13) 

Suppose, for example, that we wish to normalize u n (x) ; this is equivalent 
to choosing the constant N„ such that 



f \u n (x)\*dx = ^ r HSide-* 1 da = 1 
J-» a J-" 



The integral on the right can be expressed as a series coefficient in the 
expansion of an integral containing the product of two generating 
functions. 

n = TO = 

(13.14) 
The integral on the left of Eq. (13.14) is readily evaluated directly to give 

Tie &gt;.&lt; = Ti y (2*&gt;: (13.15) 

Li n\ 

n = 

If equal powers of s and t are equated in the series on the right sides of 
Eqs. (13.14) and (13.15), we obtain the results 

(" Hr?{£)e-?dt = -n-*2»n! 

J "° (13.16) 

/_"„ H n ($)H m (k)e-? dt = n^m 

The first of Eqs. (13.16) tells us that the normalizing constant can 
be chosen to be 

Nn , (-^y (i3.i7) 



n \ir*2»n!/ 



72 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

where a constant multiplicative complex phase factor of unit magnitude 
is still arbitrary. The second of these equations tells us that u„(x) and 
u m (x) are orthogonal to each other if n 9^ m; this is in agreement with the 
general result obtained in Sec. 10 for nondegenerate energy eigenfunc- 
tions, since, in accordance with Eq. (13.8), E„ ^ E m if n j* m, and so 
there is no degeneracy. 
The integral 

f v*{x)xu m {x) dx = ^^ f° ZH n (WM)e-t* d$ 
J — °° a J — * 

is typical of others that can be evaluated with the help of the generating 
function. The two series expressions for the integral, 

n = m = 

and 

Li n\ 

n=0 

may be equated term by term. With the"iielp of Eq. (13.17), we get 

/ l ( n + A * 

r- r^ ' 

\ u*(x)xu m {x) dx = \ 1 /nV , (13.18) 

/ a \2/ 
\ otherwise 

CORRESPONDENCE WITH CLASSICAL THEORY 

Plots of the first six harmonic-oscillator wave functions are shown in 
Fig. 10. It is apparent that the position probability densities |m„| 2 
associated with these stationary wave functions have little resemblance 
to the corresponding densities for the classical harmonic oscillator; the 
latter are proportional to (£ 2 - $ 2 ) -i , where £ is the amplitude of the 
classical oscillator whose energy is equal to the quantum-mechanical 
eigenvalue. The agreement between classical and quantum probability 
densities improves rapidly with increasing n. Figure 11 contains a plot 
of \u„\ 2 for n = 10 (solid curve) and of the density of a classical oscillator 
of total energy ^-fua e (dashed curve). The agreement is fairly good, on 
the average, the principal discrepancy being the rapid oscillations in |w„| 2 . 
The expectation value for the potential energy can be obtained 
from Eq. (7.6) : 



(V) n = f~ m ut(x)1zKx*u n (x) dx 
2a 



= $K ^±i = 1 (n + i)ftco c = $E n 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 



73 




_ 




nxnix 




| 






__i 1 1^. 




















t 






' ii i r i 




•| 






/ 1 / 

, Lit. 4 J. J I 






j 




/ 1/ 




■'1 












yj i i i ' n 




l 3 ' 


1 .... 




L.J LU L 







i — i 








1 






1 A ft 

l--i-f+4i 1 












1 

\ 

1 








" 'il/TTl/T 




1 


j 




[V/ ! \J\ 




1 


I 




" 1 I-- -" 




4 






_1_LI Li_ 




,- j 







-r-TJTI 1 






A ' 






fX y\[ [ \t 














j\ 1 [ [ | re i=f5 ! 






■1 ! ! ! 1 1 P 



-4-2 2 4 



-4-2 2 4 



-4-2 2 4 



Fig. 10 Energy eigenfunctions for the first six states of the harmonic oscillator. 
[After L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, Jr., "Introduction to Quantum Mechanics," 
pp. 74-75 {McGraw-Hill, New York, 1935).] 



where Jx 2 |m„| 2 dx can be calculated with the help of the generating func- 
tion in analogy with the evaluation of Eq. (13.18). Thus, for any value 
of n, the average potential and kinetic energies are each half of the total 
energy, just as is the case with the classical oscillator. 

In similar fashion it can be shown that (x) = (p) = for any 
harmonic-oscillator wave function, so that Eq. (12.1) tells us that 
(Ax) 2 = (x 2 ) and (Ap) 2 = (p 2 ). It is then easy to see that the uncer- 
tainty product is 

Ax • Ap = (n + %)h 

This has the minimum possible value ih of Eq. (12.7) for the ground- 
state eigenfunction 



u (x) = -, e-W* 

IT* 



(13.19) 



which, as would be expected, is of the form of the minimum packet 
(12.11). Thus the minimum packet happens to be an eigenfunction of 
the harmonic-oscillator wave equation if its Ax is properly related to K 
and m. 



74 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 

r 




Fig. 11 The position probability density for the state n = 10 of a harmonic 
oscillator (solid curve) and for a classical oscillator of the same total energy 
(dashed curve). [After L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, Jr., "Introduction to Quantum 
Mechanics," p. 76 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1935).] 



OSCILLATING WAVE PACKET 



In accordance with Eq. (10.18), the general solution of the time-dependent 
Schrodinger equation for the harmonic oscillator 



ih j t $(x,t) 



can be expanded in terms of stationary wave functions 
xf&gt;(x,t) = J A n u n (x)e- iE ^ h = e-**.« £ A n u n (x) € ~' 



(13.20) 



where the A n are arbitrary constants. Thus, apart from the phase 
factor e - *^', \J/(x,t) is a periodic function of t with the period of the 
classical oscillator 27r/w c . This suggests that it might be possible to find 
a solution in the form of a wave packet whose center of gravity oscillates 
with the period of the classical motion. 1 
1 E. Schrodinger, Naturwiss. 14, 664 (1926). 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 75 

To investigate this possibility, we assume that at t = the \p of 
Eq. (13.20) has the form of the normalized minimum packet (13.19), 
except that the center of gravity is displaced in the positive x direction 
by an amount a. 

*(*,&lt;)) = J A n u n (x) = ^e-i« s &lt;*-°&gt; 2 (13.21) 

n = 

We can make use of the orthonormality of the u n to calculate a particular 
coefficient A m by multiplying Eq. (13.21) through by u*(x) and integrat- 
ing over x. 

A m = f" &lt;(x)iKx,0) dx = ^l f HUOe-K'e-W-M* d£ 

£o = aa 

The integral on the right can be evaluated with the help of the generating 
function by equating term by term the two series expressions for the 
integral: 



J-co Li n\ J-* 



and 



Trie-W+'io = Tpie-lfo 8 V 



(s£o) n 



n = 

On making use of Eq. (13.17), we obtain 

(2-n!)» 
Substitution of these A n into Eq. (13.20) gives 



(13.22) 



n = 

= ^ exp (-U* - \tf - \iu c t - -Ho 2 e- 2 *"« + ^ o e---0 



= -r exp [— i(£ — £o cos cocO 2 

— i'(£« e £ + ££o sin w c t — -££ 2 sin 2u e t)] 

where the sum is evaluated with the help of the generating function 
(13.10). The absolute square of this wave function gives a position 
probability density 



hK*,0| 2 = -%-«'&lt; 

7T* 



x— a cos o&gt; c t) * 



76 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

This shows that \p represents a wave packet that oscillates without 
change of shape about x = 0, with amplitude a and the classical 
frequency. 

As a — &gt; 0, \p approaches the lowest energy eigenfunction u (x)e~ iia ' t . 
The larger a becomes, the larger the number of stationary states that 
contribute significantly to the packet, and the larger the quantum num- 
ber n for which A n of Eq. (13.22) has a maximum. For n » 1, we can 
use Stirling's formula to maximize In A n ; neglecting terms of order In n 
and lower 

In A n ~ n(ln £ — i In 2) — £n(ln n — 1) 

lt2 Ka* (13.23) 

Thus the energy level E n&lt;l = (n + i)/ko c , from whose neighborhood most 
of the contribution to \p comes, is approximately equal to the energy 
\Ka % of the classical oscillator that has the same amplitude. 



14DSPHERICALLY SYMMETRIC POTENTIALS IN THREE DIMENSIONS 

It is generally impossible to obtain analytic solutions of the three- 
dimensional wave equation (8.2) unless it can be separated into total 
differential equations in each of the three space coordinates. It has 
been shown 1 that there are 11 coordinates systems in which the free- 
particle wave equation [Eq. (8.2) with V = 0] can be separated. One 
of the most important of these is the spherical polar coordinate system, 
in terms of which the rectangular coordinates are given by (see Fig. 12) 

x = r sin cos &lt;t&gt; 
y = r sin sin &lt;£ 
z = r cos 

If the potential energy is spherically symmetric, so that V(r) = V(r) is a 
function only of the magnitude r of r measured from some origin, the wave 
equation can always be separated in spherical coordinates. Many prob- 
lems of physical interest can be represented exactly or approximately 
in terms of spherically symmetric potentials of various shapes. In this 
section we effect the separation and solve the resulting total differential 
equations in and &lt;f&gt;. The next two sections deal with the solution of 
the radial equation for particular forms of V(r). 

1 L. P. Eisenhart, Phys. Rev. 45, 428 (1934). See also L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, 
Jr., "Introduction to Quantum Mechanics," App. IV (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1935). 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 



77 



Polar 
axis 



Fig. 12 The relation between rec- 
tangular and spherical polar coor- 
dinates of a point P. 




SEPARATION OF THE WAVE EQUATION 



The wave equation (8.2) with a spherically symmetric potential energy 
may be written in spherical coordinates : 



*1 

2ra 



\_r 2 dr\ drj 



+ 



r 2 sin dd 



+ V(r)u = Eu (14.1) 



We first separate the radial and the angular parts by substituting 

u(r,8,4) = R(r)Y(0,4&gt;) 
into Eq. (14.1) and dividing through by u. 

2mr 2 



ld( 2 dR\ 
Rdr\ dr) 



+ 



h* 



[E - v{r)] 



l [ l a ( . a dY\ , i a*Yl „. ox 

Since the left side of Eq. (14.2) depends only on r, and the right side 
depends only on 6 and &lt;f&gt;, both sides must be equal to a constant that 
we call X. Thus Eq. (14.2) gives us a radial equation 



7.| r (-f)+{^ [£ - FWI -^} fl = ° 
ar equation 



and an angular equation 
1 d 



sin dd 



1 d 2 Y 
sin 2 d&lt;f&gt; 2 



(14.3) 



(14.4) 



78 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The angular equation (14.4) can be further separated by substituting 
Y(8,&lt;t&gt;) = Q(d)$(&lt;f&gt;) into it and following the same procedure to obtain 

B + * = ° (14 - 5) 



1 d 

sin 6 dd 



( si "«lD + ( x ~^) e=0 (l4 - 6&gt; 

The &lt;f&gt; equation (14.5) can be solved at once; its general solution may be 
written 

$(&lt;*&gt;) = Ae'*** + Be~ iM v ^ 

V ' (14.7) 

$(&lt;/&gt;) = A + B&lt;f&gt; v = 

The requirement of Sec. 8 that &lt;$(&lt;/&gt;) and d$/d4&gt; be continuous through- 
out the domain to 2tt of &lt;f&gt; demands that v be chosen equal to the square 
of an integer. We thus replace Eqs. (14.7) by 

*„(*) = (27r)-V m * (14.8) 

where now all physical meaningful solutions are included if m is allowed 
to be a positive or negative integer or zero; 1 the multiplying constant is 
chosen equal to (27r) _i in order that $ be normalized to unity over the 
range of &lt;f&gt;. 

LEGENDRE POLYNOMIALS 

Unless V(r) is specified, the farthest we can carry our treatment is the 
solution of the 6 equation (14.6), where now v = m 2 . It is convenient to 
substitute w = cos 6 for 6 and put 

0(6) = P(w) 

when Eq. (14.6) becomes 

Since the domain of is to w, the domain of w is 1 to — 1. The proce- 
dure for solving Eq. (14.9) is in many respects similar to the solution of 
the harmonic-oscillator wave equation presented in Sec. 13 and will not 
be given in detail here. 2 Since Eq. (14.9) is a second-order differential 
equation, it has two linearly independent solutions. Except for particu- 
lar values of X, both of these are infinite at w = ±1 and, in accordance 

1 At the very slight risk of confusion with the mass of the particle, we make use of 
the customary symbol m for the quantum number associated with the coordinate &lt;f&gt;. 

2 For a complete discussion of this equation, see E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson, 
"A Course of Modern Analysis," 4th ed., chap. XV (Cambridge, London, 1935). 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 79 

with Sec. 8, are not physically acceptable. If, however, X = 1(1 -f- 1), 
where I is a positive integer or zero, one of the solutions is finite at w = +1 
(the other is not); this finite solution has the form (1 — w 2 ) iM times a 
polynomial of order I — \m\ in w and has the parity of I — |ra|. 

The physically acceptable solutions of Eq. (14.9) when ra = are 
called the Legendre polynomials Pi(w). Just as is the case with the 
Hermite polynomials, their properties may be discussed in terms of a 
generating function 

T(w,s) = (1 - 2sw + « 2 )-* 

00 

= y P,(w)s J s &lt; 1 (14.10) 

1 = 

Differentiation of the generating function with respect to w and s leads to 
relations that are analogous to Eqs. (13.11) for the Hermite polynomials. 

(1 - w*)P[ = -IwPi + IPi-x 

(I + l)P l+1 = (21 + l)wP t - IPi^r (14 " U) 

where primes denote differentiation with respect to w. The lowest-order 
differential equation involving only P t that can be constructed from Eqs. 
(14.11) is easily seen to be Eq. (14.9) with X = 1(1 + 1) and m = 0. 

For m not necessarily equal to zero, Eq. (14.9) has physically 
acceptable solutions if X — 1(1 + 1) and \m\ &lt; I. These solutions, which 
are called associated Legendre functions, are expressible in terms of the 
Legendre polynomials: 

d\ m \ 
Pi m (w) = (1 - ™&gt;)*H g^s Pi(w) (14.12) 

This can be shown by substitution of Eq. (14.12) into the equation that 
is obtained by differentiating \m\ times the equation for Pi(w). The 
generating function for the associated Legendre functions is obtained by 
differentiating Eq. (14.10) \m\ times with respect to w and multiplying 
by (1 - w 2 )* M . 

(2|m|)!(l - w i)tM«M 
*M«W 2M(|m|)!(l - 2sw + s 2 )M+l 

CO 

= y P t m (w)s l (14.13) 

I-H 

SPHERICAL HARMONICS 

The angular part Yi m (d,&lt;f&gt;) of the complete wave function, which is a 
solution of Eq. (14.4) when X = 1(1 + 1), is called a spherical harmonic. 



SO QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It is apparent that 

Y lm (S,4&gt;) = N lm Pr(cos 0)$ m (*) (14.14) 

where * m (&lt;/&gt;) is given by Eq. (14.8), and Ni m is the normalization constant 
for the associated Legendre function. 

The same proof that was given in Sec. 10 for the orthogonality of 
the energy eigenfunctions may be used to show that solutions of Eq. 
(14.4) corresponding to different eigenvalues \ or I are orthogonal. The 
eigenvalue I is, however, (21 + l)-fold degenerate, since there exist 
linearly independent solutions Yi m (6,&lt;f&gt;) for this value of I and all integer 
values of m between +Z and — 1. The choice of Eq. (14.8) for &lt;£ m (&lt;£) 
makes these degenerate eigenfunctions orthogonal. We have then that 
the integral 

\l P Yf m (d,&lt;t&gt;)Yv ml (0,&lt;f&gt;) sin dddd&lt;l&gt; = j l _ x J** Yf m Y Vm . dw d&lt;t&gt; 

vanishes unless I = V and m = m'. It is interesting to note that there 
is no more orthogonality present than is necessary to make this integral 
vanish when it should. Thus the 4&gt; part of the integral vanishes when 
m ?± m' without regard for the I values; the or w part of the integral 
vanishes only when I 9^ V and \in\ = \m'\, since for m ?* m' the ortho- 
gonality is taken care of by the integration over &lt;t&gt;. 
The integral 



/. 



j Pi m {w)P v m (w) dw (14.15) 

can be evaluated in various ways, for example, by using the generating 
function (14.13) in a manner similar to that described in Sec. 13. As 
expected, the integral (14.15) vanishes unless I = I', when it has the 
value [2/(21 + 1)J[(Z + \m\)\/(l - |ra|)!]; thus N im is the reciprocal of the 
square root of this quantity, except for an arbitrary complex phase factor 
of unit magnitude. For later convenience we choose the spherical har- 
monics to be 

r,„(w) = . p^giHJ'J p '" (cos « )e&lt;mt (U - 16) 

where e = ( — 1)"* for ra &gt; and e = 1 for m &lt; 0. The first few spherical 
harmonics are 

y °- o = (4^ Y ^ = (iJ cosd 

y ^ = + (£)* sin e e± * Yi -° = (io^y (3 c ° s2 e - i) 



2.±1 



" T (&amp;) aiaeeose e± * F «' ±! = ©' 8ini ' C±M 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 81 

PARITY 

The concept of parity introduced in Sec. 9 can now be extended to three- 
dimensional problems of the type discussed in this section. Suppose that 
the position coordinate r is reflected through the origin so that r is replaced 
by — r; this corresponds to replacing £ by — x, y by —y, and z by — z, or 
to replacing 6 by t — d, &lt;f&gt; by &lt;f&gt; -f *, and leaving r unchanged. It is 
clear that the only change in the wave equation (14.1) is that u(r,6,4&gt;) is 
replaced by u(r, ir — 6, &lt;f&gt; + *■), the rest of the equation being unaffected. 
Then the discussion of Sec. 9 shows that orthogonal linear combinations 
of degenerate eigenfunctions can be found that have definite parities and 
that a nondegenerate eigenfunction must have a definite parity. 

The energy levels for a spherically symmetric potential are degener- 
ate at least with respect to the quantum number ra, for I &gt; 0. In this 
case, the degenerate eigenfunctions all have the same parity, which we 
now show to be the parity of I. When r is reflected through the origin, 
the radial part R(r) of the solution is unchanged, the «A part $(^) given 
by Eq. (14.8) has the parity of \m\, and the 6 part Pj m (cos 6) has the 
parity of I — \m\, since P t m (iv) is equal to an even part (1 — -w 2 )l M times 
a polynomial in w that has the parity of I — \m\ with respect to change 
in sign of 10 or cos 6. Thus Fj m (0,&lt;/&gt;), and hence w(r), has the parity of I. 

ANGULAR MOMENTUM 

The radial wave equation (14.3) may be rewritten in a form that resem- 
bles the one-dimensional wave equation (8.5). If we put R(r) = x(r)/r, 
the equation for the modified radial wave function x may be written 

Thus the radial motion is similar to the one-dimensional motion of a 
particle in a potential 

Vf . . 1(1+ l)h 2 

F(r) + 2mr» &lt; 14 - 18 &gt; 

The additional "potential energy" can be seen physically to be connected 
with the angular momentum in the following way. A classical particle 
that has angular momentum L about the axis through the origin per- 
pendicular to the plane of its orbit has the angular velocity w = L/mr 2 
when its radial distance from the origin is r. An inward force 

moa 2 r = — z 
mr* 

is required to keep the particle in this path; this "centripetal force" is 
supplied by the potential energy and hence adds to the V(r) that appears 



give 



82 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

in the radial motion an additional "centrifugal potential energy" L 2 /2mr 2 . 
This has exactly the form of the extra term in (14.18) if we put 

L = [1(1 + l)H 

The foregoing physical argument for identifying the quantum 
number I with the angular momentum of the particle can be put in 
quantitative form by finding the operators that correspond to the three 
components of the angular-momentum vector. Classically, we have that 
L = r X p, so that in quantum mechanics we take 

L x = yp. - zp v = -ih(yy z ~ *^) 

*&gt;-^-»ft --*(.£-*£) (14 - 19) 

L, = x Vy - yp x - -ih (x± - y. jy 
Equations (14.19) can be transformed into spherical polar coordinates to 

= ih I sin &lt;/» -r» + cot cos &lt;f&gt; — j 
L v = ih (- cos &lt;*&gt; y e + cot sin &lt;f&gt; ~\ (14.20) 

L &gt; = ~ ih lk 

The operator that represents the square of the total angular momentum 
is then found from Eqs. (14.20) to be 

L 2 = W + W + L.* 

- -w \-^ L ( sin 9 4hi + -A* £.1 ( 14 - 21 &gt; 

[sin dO \ 30/ sin 2 d&lt;£ 2 J 

Comparison of Eqs. (14.21) and (14.4) shows that Y lm (6,&lt;t&gt;) is an eigen- 
function of L 2 with the eigenvalue 1(1 + l)ft 2 : 

VY lm (0,&lt;f&gt;) = 1(1 + l)ft 2 r, m (0,&lt;*) (14.22) 

In similar fashion, it follows from the structure of Eq. (14.8) and the last 
of Eqs. (14.20) that &lt;M&lt;*&gt;), and hence also Yi m (0,&lt;t&gt;), is an eigenfunction 
of Lz with the eigenvalue mh: 

L t Y lm (6,&lt;t&gt;) = mKY lm (d,4&gt;) (!4-23) 

Thus the separation of the wave equation in spherical polar coordi- 
nates results in wave functions that are eigenfunctions of both the total 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 



83 



angular momentum and the component of angular momentum along the 
polar' axis. The quantum number I that appears in Eq. (14.22) is called 
the azimuthal or orbital-angular-momentum quantum number. The quan- 
tum number m that appears in Eq. (14.23) is called the magnetic quantum 
number, since it is of importance in the theory of the Zeeman effect (see 
Sec. 31), which involves the component of angular momentum along the 
magnetic field (z axis). It should be noted that in general the wave 
equation cannot be separated in this way and angular-momentum eigen- 
f unctions obtained if the potential energy V(r) is not spherically sym- 
metric. This corresponds to the classical result that the angular momen- 
tum is a constant of the motion only for a central field of force (which is 
describable by a spherically symmetric potential). There is, however, 
the characteristic difference between classical and quantum theory that 
all three components of L can be precisely specified at once in the classical 
theory, whereas only L z and L 2 can, in general, be precisely specified at 
once in the quantum theory, since Yi m (0,&lt;f&gt;) is not an eigenfunction of 
L x and L v (except for the case 1 = 0). The choice of the direction of the 
polar axis that distinguishes L z from L x and L v is, of course, completely 
arbitrary; it corresponds to the arbitrariness of the direction of space 
quantization in the absence of external fields in the old quantum theory. 



15DTH REE-DIMENSIONAL SQUARE WELL POTENTIAL 

We are now in a position to find the bound-state energy levels that 
correspond to particular choices of the potential energy V(r) and of the 
angular-momentum quantum number I, by solving the radial wave equa- 
tion (14.3). As a first example, we consider the square well potential of 
finite depth, for which V(r) = -V , r &lt; a, V(r) = 0, r &gt; a, where V 
is positive (see Fig. 13). A spherical region of this type in which the 
potential is less than that of the surroundings serves to attract a particle 
just as in the one-dimensional case considered in Sec. 9. 



Fig. 13 A spherically symmetric square well 
potential of depth V and radius a. 



-V t 



V(r) 



84 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

ZERO ANGULAR MOMENTUM 

When I = 0, it is easier to solve the wave equation in the form (14.17) 
than in the form (14.3). In this case, R(r) = xix)/r, and the wave 
equation is 



~2^J = Ex r&gt;a 



(15.1) 



The solution of Eqs. (15.1) is the same as that obtained for the finite 
potential step in Sec. 9, except for three points: First, the energy scale is 
lowered everywhere in the present problem by an amount V ; second, the 
domain of r is to + °°, in place of the domain — oo to + °° for x; and 
third, the boundary condition that the wave function not become infinite 
at x — — oo is now replaced by the same condition at r = 0. 

From the discussion of Sec. 9, it is apparent that the solutions of 
Eqs. (15.1) are 

x(r) = A sin ar -j- B cos ar 



ra»(F. &gt;r ui)j r &lt; a 



(15.2) 



xw - c* o = {^my 



_ / 2m| 

"\ ft 2 



where we are interested in bound-state energy levels for which E &lt; 0. 
The requirement that R(r) be finite at r = demands that we set B = 
in the first of Eqs. (15.2). Thus the solution has the form of the odd 
parity solution of the one-dimensional problem. The energy levels are 
obtained by equating the two values of (l/x)(dx/dr) at r = a [this is 
equivalent to making (l/R)(dR/dr) continuous there] and are given by 
solving 

a cot aa = — (15.3) 

which is the same as Eq. (9.6). Then it follows from the discussion of 
Fig. 9 that there is no energy level unless V a 2 &gt; ir 2 h 2 /8m; there is one 
bound state if ir 2 h 2 /8m &lt; Vga 2 &lt; 9w 2 fi 2 /8m, etc. 

INTERIOR SOLUTIONS FOR ARBITRARY I 

For nonzero values of I, it is more convenient to work with the original 
radial equation (14.3) than with the equation for x- If we put p = ar, 
where a is defined in Eq. (15.2), the wave equation for r &lt; a becomes 



d 2 R 2dR 
dp* p dp 



+ [l _ ffi + ii] B = (15.4) 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES *5 

The strong resemblance between Eq. (15.4) and Bessel's equation sug- 
gests that R (r) can be expressed in terms of Bessel functions. This is, in 
fact, the case; if we define the "spherical Bessel function" ji(p) that is 
regular at p = by 1 

Mp) - (0 Ji +i (p) (15-5) 

where J is an ordinary Bessel function of half-odd-integer order, it is 
easily verified that ji(p) satisfies Eq. (15.4). In similar fashion, the 
"spherical Neumann function" is 



(£)'- 



n t ( P ) = (-l) l + 1 ^JJ_ J _ i (p) 

It can be shown 2 that Ji +i (p), where I is a positive or negative 
integer or zero, is expressible as a sum of products of sin p and cos p with 
polynomials of odd order in p~*. In particular, explicit expressions for 
the first three j's and w's are 

. . . sin p , . cos p 

;»0» = — — »o(p) = — 

p p 



(15.6) 



. , N sin p cos p , . cos p sin p 

Ji(p) = —2 — rci(p) = - 2 — 

P p P P 

jtifi) = (j 3 - - J sin p - -5 cos p 

n«G») = ~[y- -Jcosp - -^sinp 

The leading terms for small p are 3 

P l , x (2i ~ 1)!! „ e „ N 

(2/+ 1)!! = 1-3-5 • • • (21 + 1) 

1 This definition and the properties of the ji and m are taken from P. M. Morse 
and K. U. Ingard, "Theoretical Acoustics," pp. 337-338 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 
1968). 

2 G. N. Watson, "Theory of Bessel Functions," 2d ed., p. 52 (Macmillan, New York, 
1945). 

* Equations (15.7) are useful approximations for p 8 somewhat less than 4Z + 6 and 2, 
respectively (Watson, op. cit., p. 44). 



«5 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

and the leading terms in the asymptotic expansions are 1 



ji(p) &gt; - cos [p - $(l + l)ir] 

p-»» p 

ni(p) &gt; - sin [p - !(Z + 1)tt] 

p-»00 p 



(15.8) 



Some properties of the fs and n's are 

I/o 2 (p)p 2 dp = ip 3 [jo 2 (p) + n (p)ii(p)] 
Jw 2 (p)p 2 dp = ip 3 [w 2 (p) - Jo(p)wi(p)] 

n^iptitp) - ^(p^-iCp) = ^ J &gt; (!5-9) 

ii(p)^n,(p)-fi,Cp)^j,(p) =^ 2 

The following are properties of both thej's and the n's: 

97 4- 1 
jV-i(p) +j l+ i(p) = ^Pi&lt;(p) * &gt; 

P 

T P jl(p) = 27TT [ ^" l(p) ~ (l + ^^ 

= ij-i(p) ji(p) 

p 

^ [p I+1 ii(p)] - p 1+1 Ji-i(p) l &gt; (15.10) 

^[p~'ii(p)] = -p~ l ji+i(p) 

Iji(p) dp = -jo(p) 

/io(p)p 2 dp = p 2 j'i(p) 

fj?(p)p* dp = ip»[ii'(p) - yi-i(p)in-i(p)] i &gt; o 

Since R(r) must be finite for r = 0, the desired solution for r &lt; a is 

«(r) = Ajiifltr) (15.11) 

EXTERIOR SOLUTIONS FOR ARBITRARY I 

The wave equation for r &gt; a can be put in the form (15.4) if we redefine 
p to be t/3r, where /S is given in Eq. (15.2). Since the domain of p does not 

1 Equations (15.8) are useful approximations for p somewhat larger than £l(l + 1) 
(Watson, op. cit., p. 199); however, the magnitudes (although not the phases) of ji 
and ni are given to good approximation by (15.8) if p is somewhat larger than I, which 
is approximately the value of p for which the magnitude of ji is greatest. 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 87 

now extend in to zero, there is no reason why ni cannot appear in the 
solution. The linear combination of ji and ni to be selected will be deter- 
mined by the asymptotic form, which must fall off exponentially for 
large r. This suggests that we define spherical Hankel functions 

hi^{p)=ji(p)+im{p) 
hi (2) (p) = ji(p) - ™i(p) 
which from Eqs. (15.8) have the asymptotic forms 

(15.13) 



hi 


: (1) (p) 


p-»« 


1 
-&gt; - 

" P 


e t[p-J(J+l)x] 


h 


: (2) (p) 




1 
— &gt; - 


e -«'[p-i(J+i)»l 



p— »00 p 

It can be shown that the asymptotic expansions, of which Eqs. (15.13) 
give the leading terms, contain no terms for which the exponent has the 
opposite sign to that given. 

The desired solution for r &gt; a is then 

R(r) = Bhi^(ifir) = B\ji(ifir) + ini(tfr)] (15.14) 

The first three of these functions are 

fco (1) (t|8r) = -j-e-f 
pr 

ft.&lt;" (i(3r) = i (J- r + ji) 6-8- (15. 15) 

ENERGY LEVELS 

The energy levels are obtained by requiring that (l/R)(dR/dr) be con- 
tinuous at r = a. When this condition is applied to the interior solution 
(15.11) and the exterior solution (15.15) with I = 0, we obtain Eq. (15.3). 
This may be written as 

*cot{=-„ e + ^ = 2 J^ (15.16) 

where, as in Sec. 9, we have put £ = aa and -q = /3a. The same condi- 
tion applied to the solutions for 1=1 reduces, with the help of Eqs. 
(15.6) and (15.15), to 

«£*-!- I + .1 {. + ,.- ?^ } 



88 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Equations (15.17) may be solved numerically or graphically, by the 
methods indicated for the solution of Eqs. (15.16) in Sec. 9. In general, 
there is no degeneracy between the eigenvalues obtained from the solution 
of equations like (15.16) and (15.17) for various values of I. 

It is easy to see how many energy levels Eqs. (15.17) give for various 
values of V a 2 without going through the numerical work. A new level 
appears whenever r\ is zero or cot £ is infinite. This occurs at £ = tt, 
2ir, . . . . Thus there is no energy level with I = 1 when 

F ° a ^ ^ 

there is one bound state with I = 1 if ir 2 1i 2 /2m &lt; V a 2 &lt; 2ir 2 h 2 /m, etc. 
The smallest value of V a 2 for which there exists a bound state with 
I = 1 is greater than the corresponding value of V a 2 for I = 0; this is 
reasonable from a physical point of view. The interpretation in Sec. 14 
of the I term in the radial wave equation as an additional potential energy, 
which corresponds to the repulsive "centrifugal force," suggests that a 
particle possessing angular momentum requires a stronger attractive 
potential to bind it than a particle with no angular momentum. Indeed, 
it turns out that the minimum square well potential "strength" F a 2 
required to bind a particle of orbital-angular-momentum quantum num- 
ber I increases monotonically with increasing I. 1 

16DTHE HYDROGEN ATOM 

The potential energy V(r) = —Ze 2 /r, which represents the attractive 
coulomb interaction between an atomic nucleus of charge +Ze and an 
electron of charge — e, provides another wave equation that can be 
solved analytically. This problem is of direct physical interest, since 
apart from relativistic effects (see Chap. 13), the calculated energy 
eigenvalues are in agreement with the observed energy levels of the 
hydrogen atom (Z = 1), the singly charged helium ion (Z = 2), etc. 

REDUCED MASS 

The Schrodinger wave equation developed in Sec. 6 describes the motion 
of a single particle in an external field of force. Now, however, we are 
interested in the motion of two particles (nucleus and electron) that are 
attracted to each other by a force that depends only on the distance 
between them. The form of the wave equation to be used for two parti- 
cles is suggested by the extension of the wave equation from one to three 

1 It can be shown that bound states appear with zero energy for a particular I value 
when [(l/R)(dR/dr)] r -a = — (I + l)/a; for I &gt; this is equivalent to the condition 
Ji-i(€) = where now J = (2mV 9 a 2 /h i )i. 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 89 

dimensions that was given in Sec. 6. This extension involved making 
the wave function depend on the three rectangular coordinates x, y, and 
z, instead of just on x, and introducing the momenta corresponding to 
the new coordinates as they appear in the classical expression for the 
energy. 

A similar extension from three to six rectangular coordinates leads 
directly to the Schrodinger wave equation for two particles of masses 
mi and m 2 : 

•* d ,i *\ T h * ( d * j_ d * j_ d *\ 

zh - +(xi,yi,zi,x 2 ,y 2 ,z 2 ,t) = L - _ ^_ + _ + _J 

2m 2 \dxS + dyS + dzS) 

+ V(xi,yi,zi,x 2 ,y2,z2,t) ^(zi,?i,2i,zt,ifo2s,Q (16.1) 

where the potential energy is assumed to depend in an arbitrary manner 
on all six coordinates and the time. If now the potential energy depends 
only on the relative coordinates, so that V = V(xi — x 2 , y\ — y 2 , z x — 2 ), 
an important simplification can be made. We define relative coordinates 
x, y, z and coordinates of the center of mass X, Y, Z by 

x = xi — X2 y = y\ — y% z = z x — z 2 

MX = ntiXi + W2X2 MY = miyi -f- m 2 y 2 MZ = m\Z\ -+- 1712Z2 

(16.2) 

Here, M = mi + m 2 is the total mass of the system. Equation (16.1) 
can be rewritten in terms of the new coordinates 

■* *t = T - _*L (J!L 1 d 2 

dt 2M \dX 2 "*" dY 2 i ~ 



[ 2M\c 

^ 2 ) + nw)]* ( 16 - 3 ) 



2 



2fi \dx 2 dy 2 
where 



M = ; (16.4) 

mi + m 2 K ' 

is called the reduced mass. 

Two separations of the wave equation (16.3) can now be made. 
First, the time dependence can be separated out, as in Sec. 8, and, second, 
a separation can be made into a product of functions of the relative 
coordinates and center-of-mass coordinates. The process is straight- 



90 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

forward and simple and results in 

+{x,y,z,X,Y,Z,t) = u{x,y,z)U(X,Y t Z)&lt;r**+*™* 

- ^ V 2 u + Vu = Eu (16.5) 

h 2 
— V 2 U — E'U 

where the V 2 operators in the second and third equations imply differ- 
entiation with respect to the relative and center-of-mass coordinates, 
respectively. The second of Eqs. (16.5) describes the relative motion of 
the two particles and is the same as the equation for the motion of a 
particle that has the reduced mass ju in an external potential energy V. 
The third of Eqs. (16.5) tells us that the center of mass of the system of 
two particles moves like a free particle of mass M . 

In the hydrogen-atom problem, we shall be interested in the energy 
levels E associated with the relative motion. In this case, the reduced 
mass /x is only slightly smaller than the electronic mass, since atomic 
nuclei are far more massive than electrons. 

ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR 

The separation of the relative motion in spherical coordinates is made 
as in Sec. 14. The radial equation that corresponds to the angular- 
momentum quantum number I is then 

where E &lt; for a bound state. 1 We follow the polynomial method used 
in the treatment of the harmonic-oscillator equation that was given in 
Sec. 13, and we first attempt to rewrite Eq. (16.6) in dimensionless form 
by introducing a dimensionless independent variable p = ar. Unlike Eq. 
(13.1), however, where the leading term for large x was the potential- 
energy term %Kx 2 , the leading term in Eq. (16.6) for large r is the eigen- 
value term E. We therefore choose a so that the E term becomes a 
fixed number; this makes the dominant asymptotic behavior of the solu- 
tion independent of the eigenvalue. We rewrite Eq. (16.6) as 

«('S+[H-^]«-» 

where the particular choice of the number £ for the eigenvalue term is 
arbitrary but convenient for the following development. Comparison 

1 E. Schrodinger, Ann. Physik 79, 361 (1926). 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 91 

of Eqs. (16.6) and (16.7) shows that 

As with the harmonic-oscillator equation, we first find the dominant 
behavior of R(p) in the asymptotic region p — &gt; °o. For sufficiently 
large p, it is apparent that R(p) = p"^*" satisfies Eq. (16.7) so far as the 
leading terms (which are of order R) are concerned, when n has any 
finite value. This suggests that we look for an exact solution of Eq. 
(16.7) of the form 

R(p) = F(p)eri&gt; (16.9) 

where F(p) is a polynomial of finite order in p. Substitution of Eq. 

(16.9) into Eq. (16.7) gives as the equation for F(p) 

F " + (? _ A p , + |"X_zi _ ^+ 1) 1 F - (16.10) 

where primes denote differentiation with respect to p. 

ENERGY LEVELS 

We now find a solution for F in the form 

F(p) = P a (ao + aip + a 2 p 2 + • • • ) 

= p*L(p) a ^0 s &gt; (16.11) 

This is necessarily finite for p = 0. Substitution of Eq. (16.11) into Eq. 

(16.10) gives as the equation for L 

P *L" + P [2(« + 1) - p\V + [p(X - s - 1) 

+ *(* + 1) - i(i + 1)]L = 

If p is set equal to zero in this equation, it follows from the form of L 
implied by Eq. (16.11) that s(s + 1) - 1(1 + 1) = 0. This quadratic 
equation in s has two roots: s = I and s = — (I + 1). The boundary 
condition that R(p) be finite at p = requires that we choose s — I. 
The equation for L then becomes 

P L" + [2(1 + 1) - pW + (X - I- \)L = (16.12) 

Equation (16.12) can be solved by substituting in a power series of 
the form indicated by Eq. (16.11). The recursion relation between the 
coefficients of successive terms of the series is readily seen to be 

^ = (y ;t)l + +27+2) a - (16 - 13) 



52 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

If the series does not terminate, its dominant asymptotic behavior can 
be inferred from the coefficients of its high terms: 

a v +\ 1 

a„ »-*» v 

This ratio is the same as that of the series for p n e" with any finite value of 
n. Equations (16.9) and (16.11) show that this behavior for L violates 
the boundary condition on R for large p. 

Thus the series for L must terminate. If the highest power of p in 
L is p n '(n' &gt; 0), we must choose X equal to a positive integer n, 1 such 
that 

X = n = ri + I + 1 (16.14) 

n' is called the radial quantum, number and n the total quantum number. 
Since n' and I can take on positive integer or zero values, n can have the 
values 1, 2, ... . The energy eigenvalues are given by Eq. (16.8) 

E ' - ~ l £ »l - " 5SRT. &lt; 1(U5 &gt; 

in agreement with the old quantum theory and with experiment. Unlike 
the square well potential problem considered in Sec. 15, the coulomb 
field problem gives rise to an infinite number of discrete energy levels 
extending from —iiZ 2 e*/2h 2 up to zero, for any finite value of Z. This 
is due to the slow decrease in magnitude of the coulomb potential at 
large r. 

LAGUERRE POLYNOMIALS 

The physically acceptable solutions of Eq. (16.12) with X = n may be 
expressed in terms of the Laguerre polynomials L q {p) , which can be defined 
in terms of a generating function 

g-,8/ (1-8) 



U( P ,s) 

i — s 

A T, ( n \ 

s" s &lt; 1 (16.16) 



= 2 



1 - s 
" L q (p) 



9 = * 

Differentiation of the generating function with respect to p and s leads to 
relations that are analogous to Eqs. (13.11) for the Hermite polynomials 
and (14.11) for the Legendre polynomials: 

ll — qL' q _i = —qL q -i 

, (16.17) 

L q+ i = (2q + 1 — p)L q — # 2 Z/ 9 _i 

1 The result that the allowed values of X are integers, rather than multiples of integers, 
derives from the choice of \ for the eigenvalue term in the dimensionless radial wave 
equation (16.7). 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES » 

The lowest-order differential equation involving only L q that can be 
constructed from Eqs. (16.17) is easily seen to be 

P L q + (1 - p)L' q + qL q = (16.18) 

Equation (16.18) resembles Eq. (16.12) but is not quite the same. We 
define the associated Laguerre polynomial 

L*( P ) =^ p L q ( P ) (16.19) 

On differentiating Eq. (16.18) p times, it is seen that L q p (p) satisfies 

pV" + (p + i - p) V + (q - p)V = o (16.20) 

Comparison of Eq. (16.12) with A = n and Eq. (16.20) shows that the 
desired polynomial solutions are the associated Laguerre polynomials 
Ll l +i(p), which are of order (n + I) — (2Z + 1) = n — I — 1 in agreement 
with Eq. (16.14). 

Differentiation of Eq. (16.16) p times with respect to p gives the 
generating function for the associated Laguerre polynomials: 



Q = P 

The following explicit expression may be verified by substituting it into 
Eq. (16.21), with n + I = q and 21 + 1 = p, and interchanging the order 
of the two summations: 

L n + u p) = " V" 1 ( _ 1)k+ n+i [(n + Q!]V 

n+l KP) k % (n - Z - 1 - k)l(2l -V 1 + k)\k\ 

(16.22) 

HYDROGEN-ATOM WAVE FUNCTIONS 

The radial wave function is of the form e~ ip p l Ll l +i(p). The normalization 
constant may be found by using the generating function to evaluate 
the integral 

/„" e-VKWOOJV ip - ^t-iy. (16 ' 23) 

Thus the normalized energy eigenfunctions for the hydrogen atom are 
Uni m (r,0,&lt;f&gt;) = Rni(r)Yi m (€,&lt;t&gt;) 

fl -' w - - (©' w.'+off e " yL " s ' w (16 - 24) 

h 2 2Z 

a = — ? p = r 

p.e L nao 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



where Yi m (0,&lt;f&gt;) is the normalized spherical harmonic given in Eq. (14.16); 
a is the radius of the first (circular) Bohr orbit for hydrogen (Z = 1) 
in the old quantum theory. The energy levels (16.15) may be written 

Z 2 e 2 



E n = - 



2a n 2 



The first three radial functions, which are found from Eqs. (16.22) 
and (16.24), are 

iMr) . (I)' 2e-«» 

**&gt; - (£)'('-£) -"" 

A much more complete set of these functions, with graphs of some of 
them, is given by Pauling and Wilson. 1 

It is interesting to note that each of the eigenfunctions for which 
1 = has a discontinuous gradient at r = 0, since dR n0 /dr ?* there 
and Foo is independent of 6 and &lt;f&gt;. This is a consequence of the infinite 
potential energy at that point, as can be shown by means of a limiting 
process similar to that used in Sec. 8 to derive the boundary conditions 
at a perfectly rigid wall. 

DEGENERACY 

The energy eigenvalues (16.15) depend only on n and so are degenerate 
with respect to both I and m. Thus, for each value of n, I can vary from 
to n — 1, and for each of these I values, m can vary from — I to +Z. 
The total degeneracy of the energy level E n is then 

n-l 



(21 + 1) = 2 w(n o l) + n = n* 



I 

1 = 

It follows from the discussion of Sec. 14 that the degeneracy with 
respect to m is characteristic of any central force field, for which V 
depends only on the radial distance r from some point. The I degener- 
acy, however, is characteristic of the coulomb field, as distinguished from 
most other central force fields. 2 In some problems, such as the motion of 
the valence electron of an alkali atom, the potential energy of the electron 

1 Pauling and Wilson, op. tit., sec. 21. 

2 The special symmetry of the coulomb field that leads to this degeneracy is discussed 
in Sec. 30. 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES 95 

is central but only approximately of the coulomb form. This prevents 
the n energy levels that have the same total quantum number n and 
different I from being coincident, so that the nth hydrogen-like level 
splits up into n distinct levels. If also some external field (such as a 
magnetic field) that destroys the spherical symmetry is imposed, the 
(21 + l)-fold m degeneracy disappears, and the nth hydrogen-like level 
is split up into n 2 distinct levels. 

The existence of degenerate energy eigenvalues means that linear 
combinations of the corresponding eigenf unctions are solutions of the 
wave equation with the same energy. In the case of the m degeneracy, 
such linear combinations of the spherical harmonics Yi m (9,&lt;t&gt;) can be 
found that correspond to a new choice of the polar axis. It is reasonable 
to expect that linear combinations of the degenerate hydrogen-atom 
eigenfunctions that have the same n and different I exist that also corre- 
spond to some new choice of the coordinates. This is, in fact, the case, 
since it turns out that the hydrogen-atom wave equation can be separated 
in parabolic coordinates. In general, degeneracy will occur whenever 
the wave equation can be solved in more than one-way (in different 
coordinate systems, or in a single coordinate system oriented in dif- 
ferent ways), since if there were no degeneracy the wave functions 
obtained in the different coordinate systems would have to be identical 
except for a multiplying constant, and that is usually not possible. For 
a general central field, an exception occurs when I = 0, since then the 
wave function is spherically symmetric and has the same form for all 
orientations of the polar axis, so that there is no degeneracy. A similar 
exception occurs in the hydrogen-atom problem when n = 1, in which 
case it turns out that the solutions obtained by spherical and parabolic 
separation of the wave equation are identical. 

SEPARATION IN PARABOLIC COORDINATES 

The parabolic coordinates £, y, 4&gt; are given in terms of the spherical 
polar coordinates by the relations 

£ = r — z = r(l — cos 0) 

r, = r + z = r (l + cos 0) (16.25) 

&lt;t&gt; = 4&gt; 

The surfaces of constant £ are a set of confocal paraboloids of revolution 
about the z or polar axis, with focus at the origin, that open in the direc- 
tion of positive z or = 0. The surfaces of constant 77 are a similar set 
of confocal paraboloids that open in the direction of negative z or . = tt. 
The surfaces of constant &lt;f&gt; are the same as in the spherical coordinate 
system: planes through the polar axis. 



96 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The wave equation for the hydrogen atom in parabolic coordinates 



is 



2m U + 



a + r,[dz\t dt) + d V y d V )\ 



+ £J£ \-^ = Eu E&lt;0 (16.26) 



The separation is accomplished by substituting 
u{^,r,,&lt;t&gt;) = fti)g(v)H&lt;l&gt;) 

into Eq. (16.26) and dividing through by u; the &lt;f&gt; part of the equation 
separates at once 1 : 



4fr 






4»Ze*to 2 M |^|^ _ 1 d** 



Since the left side of Eq. (16.27) depends only on £ and n, and the right 
side only on &lt;/&gt;, both sides must be equal to a constant that we call m 2 ; in 
accordance with the discussion of Sec. 14, this gives normalized &lt;f&gt; solu- 
tions that are the same as (14.8) : 

$ m (0) = (2tt)-V' b * m = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . (16.28) 

The rest of Eq. (16.27) can be separated into £ and rj parts: 

1 d / d/\ m* M |g| M Ze* 

/ dt V #/ 4| 2fc 2 * "*" ft 2 

[1 d / dg\ m 2 »\E\ 1 

^L^v^J-^-w^h 1 ' (1629) 

where the separation constant v is to be determined by the boundary 
conditions. Thus the equations for / and g are 



d ( df\ /«« M |2?|{ mZ6 2 \ 
d / dg\ /m 2 n\E\ v \ 



(16.30) 
&lt;ii7 



Since these two equations are of the same form and differ only in their 
constant terms, it is sufficient to solve one of them. 

1 E. Schrodinger, Ann. Physik 80, 437 (1926); P. S. Epstein, Phys. Rev. 28, 695 (1926); 
I. Waller, Z. Physik 38, 635 (1926). 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES ,97 

ENERGY LEVELS 

The first of Eqs. (16.30) may be solved by the method used to solve 
(16.6). The substitution f = a£ puts it into the dimensionless form 

f!('$ + (M -&amp;)'-» &lt; 16 - 31) 

if we choose the parameters a and Xi to be given by 

„ 2 _ 2m|#| 



1 ZnZe* \ 
= a\-W-~ V ) 



The second of Eqs. (16.30) is also of the form (16.31) if we put -f = arj 
with a given by (16.32); Xi is replaced by 

X 2 = - (16.33) 

or 

We now treat Eq. (16.31) as we did (16.7). The asymptotic 
behavior is dominated by the factor e ±if , where we must take the minus 
sign in the exponent. The series that multiplies this starts with a term 
f, where it is readily shown that s = ±{m. We therefore substitute 

/(f) = e-»ff*WL(f) (16.34) 

into (16.31) and obtain as the equation for L 

W + (H + 1 - S)U + [Xi - i(|m| + \)]L = (16.35) 

As with Eq. (16.12), the nonterminating solutions for L cause the wave 
function (16.34) to become infinite for large f. The terminating solu- 
tions are the associated Laguerre polynomials; comparison of Eqs. (16.20) 
and (16.35) shows that they are L|£+| m |(f), where 

»i = Xi - *(M + 1) (16.36) 

is a positive integer or zero. 

In similar fashion, the solution of the i\ equation shows that the 
number 

n 2 = X 2 - i(\m\ + 1) (16.37) 

is a positive integer or zero. From Eqs. (16.36) and (16.37) we obtain 

Xi + X 2 = wi + n 2 + |w| + 1 == n (16.38) 

where n is a nonzero positive integer. The energy levels are given by 
combining Eqs. (16.32), (16.33), and (16.38): 

v - \w\ h2 &lt;* 2 ^ ZV 

E n - -\E n \ = -_ = -^_ 2 

in agreement with Eq. (16.15). The energy level E n is degenerate, since 
according to (16.38) there are various ways in which the three quantum 



98 Quantum mechanics 

numbers n\, w 2 , and m can be combined to make up n. For m = 0, there 
are n ways of choosing n x and n 2 ; for \m\ &gt; 0, there are two ways of 
choosing m ( = ±\m\), and n — \m\ ways of choosing n x and w 2 . Thus 
the total degeneracy of the energy level E n is 

n-\ 

n + 2 V (n - \m\) = n + 2 jn(n - 1) - n(n ~ ^ 1 = n 2 

|w|-l 

in agreement with the earlier result. 

' WAVE FUNCTIONS 

It is clear from the foregoing discussion that the unnormalized hydrogen- 
atom wave functions in parabolic coordinates are 

u-wtel,*) = e-l»^Uv) iM L l Zl m(««)LW M (ar,)e*»* 

= tiZe^ 

h 2 (ni + n 2 + \m\ + 1) 

For a particular energy level E„ and magnetic quantum number 
m (n &gt; \m\), the parabolic quantum numbers ni and n^ can be chosen 
such that ni + w 2 = n — |m| — 1, that is, in n — |m| different ways. 
Similarly, for given n and m, the azimuthal quantum number I in the 
spherical solution can be chosen such that \m\ &lt; / &lt; n — 1, and so also 
in n — |w| different ways. Thus the n — \m\ products of the ^ and -q 
functions are linear combinations of the n — \m\ products of the r and 
6 functions. 

The ground-state energy level provides a particularly simple illus- 
tration of the connection between the parabolic and spherical solutions. 
In this case, n x = n 2 = m = 0, and the parabolic solution is simply 
e -?zeHi+v)i2h\ Also, n = 1, I = m = 0, and the spherical solution is 
g-MZeV/ft' it i s apparent from Eq. (16.25) that these two solutions are 
identical. 

PROBLEMS 

1. Apply the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rules (see Sec. 2) to the determination 
of the energy levels of a harmonic oscillator and of the circular orbits in a hydrogen 
atom. Compare with the results obtained in this chapter. 

2. What is the order of magnitude of the spread of quantum numbers and energies 
of the states that contribute significantly to the oscillating-wave-packet solution for 
the harmonic oscillator? 

3. Use the generating function for the Hermite polynomials to evaluate 

/ u*(x)x 2 u m (x) dx 
where the u's are normalized harmonic-oscillator wave functions. 



DISCRETE EIGENVALUES: BOUND STATES » 

4. Use the generating function for the Legendre polynomials to evaluate 



/ 



Pi(w)Pv(w) dw 



5. Obtain an approximate analytic expression for the energy level in a square well 
potential (I = 0) when F a 2 is slightly greater than ir 2 fi 2 /Sm. 

6. Show that for a square well potential the limiting values of V a 2 that just bind 
new energy levels with an I value greater than zero are given by h 2 z 2 /2m, where the 
numbers z are the nonvanishing solutions of the equation ji-i(z) = (see footnote 1, 
page 88). 

7. Assume that the interaction between the neutron and the proton that make up 
a deuteron can be represented by a square well potential with a = 2.00 X 10 -13 cm. 
If the lowest (I = 0) energy level of the system is —2.23 Mev (million electron volts), 
calculate V&lt;&gt; in Mev to three significant figures. How does the answer compare with 
that which would be obtained from the approximate formula derived in Prob. 5? 

8. Consider Eq. (14.17) with / = and V(r) = -V e- rla . Change variables from 
r to z = e~ rl2a , and show that Bessel's equation results. What boundary condi- 
tions are to be imposed on x as a function of z, and how can these be used to determine 
the energy levels? What is the lower limit to V 9 for which a bound state exists? 

9. Find expressions for the eigenfunctions and energy levels of a particle in a two- 
dimensional circular box that has perfectly rigid walls. 

10. It is shown in Sec. 9 that a one-dimensional square well potential has a bound 
state for any positive V^a 2 , and in Sec. 15 that a three-dimensional spherically sym- 
metric square well potential has a bound state only for V a a 2 &gt; ir 2 h 2 /8m. What is 
the analogous situation for a two-dimensional circularly symmetric square well poten- 
tial? What, if any, is the physical significance of these results? 

11. The Schrodinger equation for a rigid body that is constrained to rotate about a 
fixed axis and that has a moment of inertia / about this axis is 

W n* ay 

%n dt 2/ 64&gt; 2 

where ^(&lt;M) is a function of the time t and of the angle of rotation, &lt;j&gt;, about the axis. 
What boundary conditions must be applied to the solutions of this equation? Find 
the normalized energy eigenfunctions and eigenvalues. Is there any degeneracy? 

12. Find the energy levels of a three-dimensional isotropic harmonic oscillator 
[V(r) = %Kr 2 ] by solving the wave equation in cartesian coordinates. What is the 
degeneracy of each level? Show that this equation can also be separated in spherical 
and in cylindrical coordinates. 

13. Show that the expectation value of the potential energy of an electron in the 
rath quantum state of a hydrogen atom is -Z 2 e 2 /a n 2 . From this result, find the 
expectation value of the kinetic energy. 

14. Find the normalized hydrogen-atom wave functions in parabolic coordinates for 
ra = 2, rra = 0. Express them as linear combinations of the corresponding wave 
functions in spherical coordinates. 

15. Discuss the parities, if any, of the hydrogen-atom wave functions in parabolic 
coordinates. 



5 
Continuous Eigenvalues: 
Collision Theory 



Problems for which the energy eigenvalues are continuously distributed 
usually arise in connection with the collision of a particle with a force 
field. The method of approach is different from that employed in the 
preceding chapter. There the boundary conditions at great distances 
were used to determine the discrete energy levels of the particle. In a 
collision problem, the energy is specified in advance, and the behavior of 
the wave function at great distances is found in terms of it. This 
asymptotic behavior can then be related to the amount of scattering of 
the particle by the force field. 

As in Chap. 4, the relatively few exact solutions that are obtained 
here are of wider application than might at first seem to be the case, 
since they can serve as foundations for approximate calculations on more 
complicated systems. It is interesting to note that the study of collisions 
is particularly important in connection with atomic nuclei and elementary 
particles, where relatively little information can be obtained in other 
ways. 

100 



CONTrNUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 



101 



V„ 



Fig. 14 A one-dimensional square potential 
barrier of height V and thickness a. 



V(x) 



17DONE-DIMENSIONAL SQUARE POTENTIAL BARRIER 

We consider first the one-dimensional collision of a particle with the 
square potential barrier V(x) shown in Fig. 14. In this problem we are 
interested in a particle that approaches from the region of negative x 
and is reflected or transmitted by the barrier. In the corresponding 
classical problem, the particle is always reflected if its energy is less than 
that of the top of the barrier, and it is always transmitted if its energy is 
greater. We shall see that,, in the quantum problem, both reflection and 
transmission occur with finite probability for most energies of the particle. 
Because of the lack of symmetry between positive and negative x that 
is introduced from the beginning, it is disadvantageous to deal with 
solutions that have definite parities, and so there is no reason for making 
V(x) symmetrical about x = 0, as was done in Sec. 9. We assume, 
therefore, that V(x) = for x &lt; and x &gt; a, and V(x) = V for 
&lt; x &lt; a, where V is positive. 



ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR 

We are interested in representing a particle that approaches from the 
left with energy E &gt; and may be turned back by the potential barrier 
or penetrate through it. Thus the asymptotic behavior [in the regions 
where V(x) = 0] is as follows: For x &lt; 0, we want the wave function to 
represent a particle moving to the left (reflected particle) as well as to 
the right (incident particle); for x &gt; a, we want the wave function to 
represent only a particle moving to the right (transmitted particle). 

A particle in a force-free region that is moving in a definite direction 
with a definite energy necessarily has a definite momentum and hence 
can be represented by a one-dimensional momentum eigenfunction 
u(x) « e ipxlh if the particle is moving in the positive x direction with the 
momentum p, and u{x) « e -v*/» if the particle is moving in the negative 
x direction with the same energy. Thus, since the wave equation in the 



102 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

regions where V(x) = is 
% 2 d 2 u 



2m dx 2 




our asymptotic solutions are 




u(x) = Ae ikx + Be~ ikx 


x&lt; 


u(x) = Ce** 


a; &gt; a 



(17.1) 

where fc = p/h = + (2mE/fi 2 ) i is the magnitude of the propagation 
number. The solutions (17.1) are appropriate for the force-free regions 
that are external to any scattering potential, whether or not it has the 
simple form shown in Fig. 14. 

NORMALIZATION 

The physical meaning of the coefficients A, B, and C can be inferred by 
substituting (17.1) into the one-dimensional form of the probability 
current density given by Eq. (7.3). 

S(x) = v(\A\ 2 - \B\ 2 ) x&lt;0 

S(x) = v\C\* x&gt;a (17-2) 

where v = lik/m is the speed of a particle with propagation number k. 
Since these expressions are independent of x, the discussion of Sec. 7 
shows that they may be interpreted as the net flux (positive to the right) 
in the two regions. This interpretation is consistent with the statement 
above that A, B, and C are the amplitudes of the incident, reflected, 
and transmitted wave functions, respectively. 

The absolute normalization of the wave functions (17.1) is unim- 
portant for this problem; this is because we are interested only in the 
ratios of |B| 2 and |C| 2 to \A\ 2 , which are, respectively, the reflection and 
transmission coefficients for the barrier. It is sometimes convenient, 
however, to normalize the incident wave function to unit flux; this cor- 
responds to taking A = l/v h . Such a normalization must not be inter- 
preted as indicating that u(x) represents more than one particle; rather 
it means that we choose a large enough number of systems [each described 
by u(x)] that are identical and independent in the sense of Sec. 7, so that 
the total incident flux in all of them is unity. A more precise but some- 
times less convenient normalization would assume a one-dimensional 
"box" of length L with periodic boundary conditions and require that 
\u(x)\ 2 dx = 1. 



J(L) 



SCATTERING COEFFICIENTS 

The character of the solution inside the potential barrier depends on 
whether E is greater or less than V . Suppose first that E &gt; V , 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 105 

so that we can define a propagation number inside the barrier: 
a = [2m(E — Fo)/^ 2 ]*. Then the solution inside is 

u(x) = Fe™ + Ge-^' &lt; x &lt; a (17.3) 

The continuity of u and du/dx at x = and x = a required by the 
boundary conditions provides four relations between the five coefficients. 
We can eliminate F and G and solve for the ratios B/A and C/A. 

B (fc 2 - &lt;* 2 )(1 - e 2iaa ) 

a ~ (k + «) 2 - (k - «)v&lt;-« (174) 

C _ 4fcae ,(tt -* )o 

A ~ (fc + a) 2 - (fc - a) 2 e 2iaa 

The absolute squares of the ratios (17.4) are the scattering (reflection 
and transmission) coefficients 

#| 2 _fi 4fc 2 a 2 1- x _fi ■ ±8(8 ~ V^ Y 

A\ " |_ + (fc 2 - a 2 ) 2 sin 2 aa] [ "^ TV sin 2 aa J g) 

CI 2 |\ , (fc 2 - &lt;* 2 ) 2 sin 2 aa Y 1 _ |"i ■ *V sin2 aa l" 1 

A I = L ifc ^ J ~[ *E(E-Vo)\ 

It is readily verified from (17.5) that \B/A\ 2 + \C/A\ 2 = 1, as would 
be expected. 

Equations (17.5) show that the transmission coefficient approaches 

(i+^y (i7 - 6) 

when the particle energy approaches the energy of the top of the barrier 
(E-&gt;V ). For increasing E (E &gt; V ), the transmission coefficient 
oscillates between a steadily increasing lower envelope and unity (see 
Fig. 15). There is perfect transmission when aa = ir, 2ir, . . . , that is, 
whenever the barrier contains an integral number of half wavelengths. 1 
Interference phenomena of this type are well known in the transmission 
of light through thin refracting layers. 

The reflection and transmission coefficients for &lt; E &lt; V are 
most easily obtained by replacing a by # in Eqs. (17.4), where 
[ 2m(V -E) y 

= L V J 

The result for the transmission coefficient is 

1C| 2 f, ■ TVsinh 2 fla ]- 1 a77) 

|j| " |_ 4E(Vo-E)\ 

1 This effect also occurs when V &lt; 0, in which case the square barrier becomes a 
square well. The scattering coefficients are given by (17.5) if the sign of V is changed 
there and in the expression for a. 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



1.0 



0.8 



0.6 



0.4 



0.2 



^^g s; i»- — —n^— ■— , , 



E_ 

V 

Fig. 15 The transmission coefficient of a square barrier as a function of particle 
energy for mVvtf/W = 8. 



which decreases monotonically from the value (17.6) as E decreases 
below V . This behavior is often referred to as tunneling through the 
barrier. When /3a 2&gt; 1, the transmission coefficient (17.7) becomes very 
small and is given approximately by 



1QE(Vq~E) 

Vo 2 



(17.8) 



Figure 15 is a plot of the transmission coefficient computed from Eqs. 
(17.5) and (17.7) for a rather "opaque" barrier: mV^/H 2 = 8. 

SCATTERING OF A WAVE PACKET 

The foregoing treatment of scattering makes use of stationary solutions 
of the time-independent wave equation (8.2) that correspond to par- 
ticular values of the incident momentum. It is also possible to work 
with the time-dependent equation (6.16), although this is more difficult 
since even in the one-dimensional case we must deal with a partial 
differential equation in two independent variables, x and t. There is, 
however, the advantage that we can then study the motion of a wave 
packet of the general form discussed in Sec. 12 and see in what way it is 
reflected from and transmitted by the potential. 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 105 

There are two ways of approaching this problem. The solution 
can be expanded in energy eigenfunctions, as in Eq. (12.15), and the 
summation carried out explicitly as in the transition from Eqs. (12.18) 
and (12.19) to (12.20). Although this could be done analytically in 
Sec. 12 for a free particle, it is generally impossible when a potential is 
present. The other approach consists in performing a numerical inte- 
gration of Eq. (6.16), choosing small but finite time intervals, and 
approximating the differential equation in the time by a difference 
equation. Even in the one-dimensional case this is feasible only 
with a high-speed computer, and special computational techniques must 
be invented to make the problem manageable. Some typical graphs 
are reproduced here from a very large number that form the basis of com- 
puter-generated motion pictures. 1 

In these computations, units are chosen such that ft = 1 and m = £. 
The unit of length can still be chosen arbitrarily and is slightly longer 
than the total length of the abscissa shown in each graph. Then the time 
and the reciprocal of the energy are each expressed in terms of a unit that 
is the square of the length unit. The incident wave packet is of the 
gaussian form (12.11), with Ax = 0.035 and &lt;p&gt; = 50V, 70.7tt, and 100ir. 
The potential has breadth a = 0.064 and strength V = ±(70.7ir) 2 , so 
that the mean energy of the incident wave packet is £|F |, |V |, and 2| V |- 
Succeeding frames of the motion picture are shown in Fig. 16 when the 
mean energy of the wave packet is half the barrier height, and in Fig. 17 
when the mean energy is equal to V . Figures 18 and 19 show the 
attractive case in which the mean energy is half of the well depth and 
equal to the well depth, respectively. In all these cases, |^| 2 is plotted 
as ordinate and x as abscissa, and the potential width and position are 
indicated; the number in each frame denotes the time in arbitrary units. 
Figure 17 is especially interesting, since it shows how the probability 
decays slowly and bounces back and forth within the barrier when the 
mean kinetic energy of the particle in the barrier is zero. 

18DCOLLISIONS IN THREE DIMENSIONS 

We are primarily concerned in this chapter with collisions in three 
dimensions, in which a particle collides with a fixed force field or two 
particles collide with each other. It was shown in Sec. 16 that the prob- 
lem of the nonrelativistic motion of two particles, when the only forces 
present depend on their relative positions, can be broken up into two one- 
particle problems, of which one describes the motion of the particles 
relative to each other or to their center of mass, and the other describes 
the free motion of the center of mass. Although the center of mass can be 
1 A. Goldberg, H. M. Schey, and J. L. Schwartz, Am. J. Phys. 36, 177 (1967). 



106 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 




280 




200 




320 



480 





560 




240 




440 




800 




Fig. 16 Gaussian wave-packet scattering from a square barrier when the mean energy 
of the packet is half the barrier height. 



taken to be at rest in calculating the energy levels of the internal motion, 
as in Sec. 16, it has a definite motion in a collision that cannot be ignored 
in calculating the outcome of such an experiment. This is because the 
customary laboratory procedure consists in bombarding a particle that 
is initially at rest with another particle that carries the total energy 
E = E + E' of Eq. (16.5). Thus the energy E of the relative motion of 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 



107 




300 




400 




600 



650 



700 





Jl 



800 



1050 



1450 




^ 



w 



Fig. 17 Same as Fig. 16, with the mean energy equal to the barrier height. 



the two particles is different from the bombarding energy E&lt;&gt;, and the 
observed scattering depends on whether the struck particle or the center 
of mass is initially at rest. 

We call the coordinate system in which the bombarded particle is 
initially at rest the laboratory coordinate system and the coordinate system 
in which the center of mass of the two colliding particles is (initially 



108 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 




280 



200 




360 




520 



^**K 




A 



640 




440 



JA 



680 




Fig. 18 Gaussian wave-packet scattering from a square well when the mean energy 
of the packet is half the well depth. 

and always) at rest the center-of-mass coordinate system. It is evidently 
easier to calculate the result of a collision experiment in the center-of- 
mass system than in the laboratory system, since only 3 degrees of free- 
dom appear in the former as compared with 6 in the latter system. The 
collision process in the center-of-mass system may then be thought of as 
one in which a particle that has the reduced mass n = Wiw 2 /(wii + m 2 ) 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 



109 




400 




700 




300 




350 



500 





600 



800 




A 



950 




Fig. 19 Same as Fig. 18, with the mean energy equal to the well depth. 



of Eq. (16.4) and an initial velocity v collides with a fixed scattering 
center [see the discussion of Eq. (18.9) below]. The distribution in angle 
of the scattered particles will be affected by the transformation between 
the center-of-mass coordinate system, in which the calculations are made, 
and the laboratory coordinate system, in which the observations are 
made. 



110 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

SCATTERING CROSS SECTION 

The angular distribution of particles scattered by a fixed center of force 
or by other particles is conveniently described in terms of a scattering 
cross section. Suppose that we bombard a group of n particles or scatter- 
ing centers with a parallel flux of N particles per unit area per unit time 
and count the number of incident particles that emerge per unit time in 
a small solid angle Awo centered about a direction that has polar angles 
#o and &lt;f&gt;o with respect to the bombarding direction as polar axis. This 
number will be proportional to N, n, and Aa&gt; , provided that the flux is 
small enough so that there is no interference between bombarding parti- 
cles and no appreciable diminution of the bombarded particles by 
their recoil out of the target region, and provided also that the bombarded 
particles are far enough apart so that each collision process involves only 
one of them. 

Then the number of incident particles that emerge per unit time in 
Ao&gt;o can be written 

nNcr (e ,4&gt;o) Aojo (18.1) 

where the proportionality factor &lt;r o (0o,&lt;£o) is called the differential scatter- 
ing cross section. Since (18.1) has the dimensions of reciprocal time, 
0"o(0o,&lt;£o) has the dimensions of an area. &lt;ro(6o,&lt;f&gt;o) Aa&gt; is equal to the cross- 
sectional area of the parallel incident beam that contains the number of 
particles scattered into Aoj by a single target particle or scattering center. 
The integral of &lt;ro(6o,&lt;l&gt;o) over the sphere is called the total scattering cross 
section 

&lt;to = JVo(0o,#o) dm (18.2) 

For the collision of a particle with a fixed scattering center, the 
definition (18.1) of differential scattering cross section is equally valid in 
the laboratory and center-of-mass coordinate systems, since a scattering 
center that is fixed has an infinite effective mass and so the center of 
mass of the system does not move. For a collision between two particles 
of finite mass, however, the differential cross section (18.1) applies in 
general only to the laboratory coordinate system and to the observation 
of the scattered incident particle. It does not describe the observation of 
the recoil bombarded particle in the laboratory system, although it is 
of course possible to obtain a differential cross section for the recoil 
particle from ao(0o,&lt;£o)- In the center-of-mass system the differential 
cross section &lt;r(d,&lt;t&gt;) may be defined in analogy with (18.1), where again 
the scattered incident particle is the one that is observed and the flux N 
of the incident particle is computed with respect to the bombarded 
particle, not the center of mass. Since in this coordinate system the two 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY HI 

particles move in opposite directions away from each other after the 
collision, it is clear that the differential cross section for observation of 
the recoil bombarded particle in the direction 0, &lt;j&gt; is just &lt;r(j — 0, &lt;/&gt; + tt). 

RELATIONS BETWEEN ANGLES IN THE LABORATORY AND CENTER-OF-MASS SYSTEMS 

The relation between the differential cross sections and angles in the 
laboratory system and in the center-of-mass system can be found by 
translating the laboratory system in the direction of the incident particle 
with sufficient speed to bring the center of mass to rest. Figure 20a 
shows a particle of mass m x and initial speed v striking a particle of 
mass m-i that is initially at rest ; the center of mass moves to the right with 
the speed v' = nnv/(mi + m 2 ), as may be seen from the conservation of 
momentum. Thus in the center-of-mass system the particles of masses 
mi and m 2 approach the center of mass with speeds 

,, , m 2 v 

v = v — v = 



and t/, respectively. If the collision is elastic, they evidently recede from 
the center of mass after the collision with the same speeds (see Fig. 206). 
It follows from the geometry of the situation that and &lt;f&gt; are. related to 
do and 0o by 

v" cos + v' = Vi cos O 

v" sin = vi sin O (18.3) 

From the first two of Eqs. (18.3) we obtain, on elimination of V\, 

. . sin v' mi /1r&gt; .. 

tan O = — r- y = — = —t (ISA) 

y + cos v" m 2 K ' 

Equations (18.3) and (18.4) can be valid for inelastic collisions 
as well. Consider a general binary collision (for example, a nuclear 
reaction) in which a particle of mass m x strikes a particle of mass m 2 
initially at rest and, after the collision, particles of masses ra 3 and m 4 
emerge, where m x + m 2 = m 3 + ra 4 . If also an amount of energy, Q, 
is converted from internal energy to kinetic energy of the emergent 
particles (Q is positive for exothermic and negative for endothermic 
collisions) and the particle of mass m 3 is observed, the first of Eqs. (18.4) 
is still valid. In this case y is still equal to the ratio of the speed of the 
center of mass in the laboratory system to the speed of the observed 
particle in the center-of-mass system. However, y is no longer mi/m 2 
but can be shown to be given by 



7 



= + (^2 * y (l8 . 5) 

\m 2 m4 E + Q) v J 



112 



mi 




(a) 



\ 




Fig. 20 (a) Laboratory coordinate system, in which the target particle 
of mass to 2 is initially at rest, (b) Center-of-mass coordinate system, 
in which the center of mass is initially and always at rest, (c) Vector 
addition of velocity of center of mass in laboratory system (v') to velocity 
of observed particle in center-of-mass system (v") to give velocity observed 
in laboratory system (vi); if v" &lt; v', B cannot exceed the angle sin -1 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 113 

where E = mim 2 v 2 /2(mi + m 2 ) is the energy initially associated with the 
relative motion in the center-of-mass system [see the discussion of Eq. 
(18.9) below]. 

RELATION BETWEEN CROSS SECTIONS 

The relation between the cross sections in the laboratory and center-of- 
mass coordinate systems can be obtained from their definitions, which 
imply that the same number of particles are scattered into the differential 
solid angle duo about O , &lt;i&gt;o as are scattered into du about 0, 4&gt;. 

o-o(0o,0o) sin O dd d&lt;t&gt; = &lt;r(0,&lt;/&gt;) sin dO d&lt;f&gt; (18.6) 

With the help of the last of Eqs. (18.3) and the first of Eqs. (18.4), Eq. 
(18.6) gives 

where in general 7 is given by Eq. (18.5). It should be noted that the 
total cross section is the same for both laboratory and center-of-mass 
systems and also for both the outgoing particles, since the total number 
of collisions that take place is independent of the mode of description of 
the process. 

DEPENDENCE ON y 

For 7 &lt; 1, Eq. (18.4) shows that O increases monotonically from to 
ir as increases from to w. For 7 = 1, O = £0 and varies from to frr 
as varies from to v, in this case 

0-o(0o,#o) = 4 cos 0oo-(20o,0o) 

and no particles appear in the backward hemisphere in the laboratory sys- 
tem. For 7 &gt; 1, O first increases from to a maximum value sin -1 (I/7), 
which is less than £rr, as increases from to cos -1 (— 1/7); O then 
decreases to as increases further to w. In this case &lt;r o (0o,&lt;£o) is usually 
infinite at the maximum value of O , although this singularity gives a 
finite contribution to the total cross section; no particles appear beyond 
the maximum O in the laboratory system. The two values of that 
give rise to a particular value of O between and sin -1 (I/7) can be 
distinguished by the energy of the observed particle, which is greater 
for the smaller 0. 

This last case (7 &gt; 1) is illustrated schematically in Fig. 20c. The 
resultant of the velocity v" of the observed particle in the center-of-mass 
system and the velocity v' of the center of mass in the laboratory system 
gives the velocity Vi of the observed particle in the laboratory system. 
The locus of the terminal points of Vi when its origin is at the point 



114 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

is the circle of radius v". Thus, when v" &lt; v', the angle O of the resultant 
Vi with the bombarding direction cannot exceed the angle 

sin -1 —r — sin x - 
v 7 

As the ratio 7 = v'/v" decreases, the circle gets relatively larger and the 
angular range of Vi increases. 

The use of geometrical relationships in the foregoing discussion is 
valid in a quantum-mechanical system as well as in a classical system. 
This is because they are essentially relations between momentum vectors 
that are applied in the asymptotic region where the particles need not be 
precisely localized in space and hence can have definite momenta. 

It is interesting to note that the difference between laboratory and 
center-of-mass systems is negligible in the collisions of electrons with 
atoms, because of the large mass ratio of the colliding particles. In 
nuclear collisions, however, the difference between the two coordinate 
systems is usually significant. 

ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR 

The differential scattering cross section a(0,#) in the center-of-mass 
coordinate system can be found from the asymptotic form of the solution 
of the second of Eqs. (16.5), 

_ *! v'm + Vu = Eu (18.8) 

Zfj. 

which is the wave equation for the relative motion. The wave function 
u may be written as a function of the angles 6, &lt;t&gt; of Fig. 206 and the radial 
distance r between the two particles. From Eq. (16.4) the reduced mass 
is m = WiW 2 /(wi + m 2 ). The energy E associated with the relative 
motion is easily seen from Fig. 20 to be 

E - m 2 E (18.9) 

where E is the initial energy of the bombarding particle. It is interesting 
to note that E is equal to the kinetic energy of a particle whose mass is 
the reduced mass n and whose speed is the relative speed v. Thus we can 
think of Eq. (18.8) as representing the elastic collision of a particle of mass 
H, initial speed v, and kinetic energy E = ifiv 2 , with a fixed scattering 
center that is described by the potential energy F(r) ; then r is the vector 
distance from the fictitious particle n to the origin of the scattering 
potential. 

As in Sec. 17, the scattering is determined by the asymptotic form of 
u(r,d,&lt;t&gt;) in the region where 7=0. When the colliding particles are 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 



115 



far apart, we want u to contain a part that represents an incident particle 
of mass n moving in a particular direction with speed v, and a part that 
represents a radially outgoing particle : 



u(r,0,&lt;£) &gt; Ale** + r- l f{0,&lt;l&gt;)e ikr ] 



k = 



flV 



(18.10) 



The first term in Eq. (18.10) represents a particle moving in the positive 
z direction, or along the polar axis = 0, since z = r cos 0; it is an infinite 
plane wave of the form of the momentum eigenf unction (11.2), where the 
propagation vector k has the magnitude k and is directed along the polar 
axis. The second term in Eq. (18.10) represents a particle that is moving 
radially outward; its amplitude depends on and &lt;£ and is inversely 
proportional to r, since the radial flux must fall off as the inverse square 
of the distance. It is readily verified that Eq. (18.10) satisfies the wave 
equation (18.8) asymptotically through terms of order 1/r in the region 
in which V = 0, for any form of the function /(0,0). 

NORMALIZATION 

The physical meaning of the coefficient A and the angular function / 
can be inferred from a calculation of the particle flux, as in Sec. 17. 
A straightforward substitution of Eq. (18.10) into Eq. (7.3), however, 
yields interference terms between the incident and scattered waves that 
do not appear in most experimental arrangements; that they do not 
appear can be seen in the following way. 

In practice, the incident and scattered particles are separated from 
each other by collimating one or the other. Suppose, for example, that 
the experimental arrangement is as shown schematically in Fig. 21, so 
that the bombarding particles from the source S are collirriated by dia- 



D 



® 

S 




Fig. 21 Schematic diagram of a laboratory arrangement for the measurement of 
scattering, in which there is no interference between the incident and scattered 
waves at the point of observation, P. 



116 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

phragms DD into a fairly well-defined beam. Such a collimated beam 
is not an infinite plane wave of the form e ikz but can be made up by 
superposing infinite plane waves that have propagation vectors of 
slightly different magnitudes and directions. The total angular spread 
in radians will be of the order of the ratio of the wavelength of the particle 
to the diameter of the collimating aperture and so can be made extremely 
small in a practical case. Now / usually does not vary rapidly with angle, 
so that the small directional spread of the incident propagation vectors 
does not affect / significantly. Thus at the point of observation, P, only 
the / term is present, and it is essentially the same as that which appears 
in Eq. (18.10). The incident flux can be calculated from the plane-wave 
term alone, since if we go far enough from the scattering region, the / 
term can be made negligible. Thus in the region of observation, the 
interference terms are a consequence of the idealization implicit in assum- 
ing an infinite plane wave in Eq. (18.10), and they usually have no 
physical significance. 1 

Substitution of the two terms of Eq. (18.10) separately into Eq. (7.3) 
shows that the incident flux is of magnitude v\A\ 2 along the polar axis 
and that the leading term in the scattered flux is of magnitude 

v\A\*\m4)\* 
r 2 

along the outward radius. From the definition of cross section, it follows 
that 

*(fi,+) = l/(M)l 2 (IS-") 

As discussed in Sec. 17, the choice of the coefficient A is unimportant 
so far as the calculation of the scattering is concerned. The wave func- 
tion may be normalized to unit incident flux by choosing A = l/v i , or it 
may be normalized by making /|w| 2 d 3 r = 1 over a large box that has 
periodic boundary conditions. We shall often simply set A equal to 
unity. 

19DSCATTERING BY SPHERICALLY SYMMETRIC POTENTIALS 

The asymptotic behavior of the wave function determines the differential 
scattering cross section but cannot itself be found without solving the 
wave equation (18.8) throughout all space. As was the case with 
the calculation of energy levels considered in Chap. 4, this can be done 
only when the wave equation is separable, and a particular case of great 
physical interest is that in which the potential energy is spherically 
symmetric. We assume here that V is a function only of r, and we find 

1 For a somewhat exceptional case, see the discussion at the end of Sec. 20. 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 117 

the connection between the solutions separated in spherical polar coordi- 
nates and the asymptotic form (18.10); this procedure is called the 
method of partial waves. 

In the remainder of this chapter we shall not, for the most part, 
distinguish between collisions of a particle with a fixed scattering center 
and collisions between two particles treated in the center-of-mass coordi- 
nate system. 

Elastic scattering, for which V is real, is considered in this section. 
The situation in which V is complex is discussed in Sec. 20 and is of 
interest since certain inelastic processes can be described approximately 
in this way. 

ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR 

It is apparent that the problem now possesses symmetry about the polar 
axis, so that u, f, and a are independent of the angle &lt;f&gt;. The general 
solution of Eq. (18.8) can then be written as a sum of products of radial 
functions and Legendre polynomials (see Sec. 14) ; for later convenience 
we write this in the form 



u(r,d) = V (21 + l)t l fl,(r)Pi(cos 0) 

1 = 

CO 

= V (21 + lKr-^MP^cos 6) (19.1) 

1=0 

where P t is the Legendre polynomial of order Z, and xi satisfies the 
equation 

^ + r i ._ P(r) _ffi+2)i xl _o 

(19 2) 

* = (¥)' "m-s^. 

The boundary condition at r = that Ri be finite or xi vanish deter- 
mines the asymptotic form of the solution (19.2) except for an arbitrary 
multiplicative constant. 

In order to find the general nature of this asymptotic behavior, we 
consider r to be so large that the U and I terms in Eq. (19.2) can be 
neglected. Then the solution of Eq. (19.2) is one of the forms e± ikr . To 
get a better approximation, we put 

Xi(r) = A exp [///(r') dr'] e± ikr (19.3) 

where A and a are constants. The first exponential is assumed to be a 
slowly varying function of r for large r, which implies that f(r) falls off 



118 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

more rapidly than r~ l as r— &gt; &lt;». Substitution of (19.3) into (19.2) 
gives the following equation for /: 

/' + P ± 2ikf = U(r) + l(l + ^ = W(r) (19.4) 

where the prime denotes differentiation with respect to r. If now W(r) 
falls off like r~* for large r (s &gt; 0), the last term on the left side is the 
leading term, and / also falls off like r~". In this case, xi varies like e ±ikr 
for large r if s &gt; 1, since then the integral in the exponent of Eq. (19.3) 
converges for large r. If, on the other hand, W falls off like an exponen- 
tial or error function of r (which implies that 1 = 0), the first and third 
terms on the left side of Eq. (19.4) may both have to be considered. It 
can then be shown without difficulty that xi again varies like e ±ikr for 
large r. The coulomb field, for which U and W vary like r -1 for large r 
regardless of the value of I, is the only case of physical interest that 
requires special attention and will be discussed in Sec. 21. 

The asymptotic form of xi(r) can then be written quite generally 

Xi(r) * A\ sin (At + d[) (19.5) 

where thus far A\ and b\ can be complex. The solution of (19.2) that 
vanishes at r = is unique except for a multiplying constant. It can 
be shown that this solution is real everywhere if it starts out to be real at 
r = 0, since k, U, and I are all real. Thus S\ must be real, although A\ 
need not be. This being the case, it is readily verified that the total 
radial flux of particles through a large sphere vanishes : 

lim 2-n-r 2 f' S r sin dd = (19.6) 

r — ► qo ^ 

where S r is the radial component of the vector (7.3) calculated by sub- 
stituting u{r,B) from Eq. (19.1) into it. This means that no sources or 
sinks of particles are present, and the particles that are scattered radially 
outward are supplied by the incident plane wave. 

DIFFERENTIAL CROSS SECTION 

It is convenient to redefine the amplitude A\ and phase angle 8 [ that 
appear in Eq. (19.5) in terms of a somewhat more specialized problem. 
It will be assumed that U(r) can be neglected for r greater than some 
distance a; in cases of practical interest, a may be small enough so that 
the I term in (19.2) is not negligible. We can then divide the domain of 
r into three regions. In the first, U(r) cannot be neglected, and the form 
of Ri(r) depends on U. In the second, U(r) can be neglected, but the I 
term in (19.2) is not negligible. Then the most general form for Ri(r) 
that is real (except possibly for a complex multiplying constant) is shown 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 119 

in Sec. 15 to be 

R t (r) = Ai[cos S t ji(kr) - sin «mi(ftr)] (19.7) 

where 8 t is real. In the third region, the I term as well as U is negligible, 
and Ri(r) is obtained from the asymptotic formulas (15.8): 

Ri(r) -^ (kr)~ l Ai sin (At - $W + «,) (19.8) 

Equations (19.5) and (19.8) agree if Ai = kA\ and 8i = 8' t + ^Zx. 

We now wish to identify the asymptotic form of (19.1) with (18.10). 
To do this, we require an expansion of e ik " = e ikrco " e in Legendre poly- 
nomials: 1 



pt'fcr cos 8 = 

1=0 



= % (21+ l)*Vi(fcr)Pi(cos 6) (19.9) 



Substituting the asymptotic form of (19.9) into (18.10) with A = 1, and 
equating this to the asymptotic form of (19.1), we obtain 



£ (21 + IMfcr)- 1 sin (At - -|Z7r)P,(cos 0) + i^yC^e*' 

2=0 

= J (2J + l)Mj(Ar)- 1 sin (At - \hr + Sj)P*(cos 0) 

1=0 

When the sine functions are written in complex exponential form, the 
coefficients of e ikT and of e~ ikT on the two sides of this equation must be 
equal to each other: 

CO 

2ikf(0) + J (21 + l)t I e-* a 'Pi(cos 0) 
i-o 

= £ (21 + l)tMiC'««-»'*)p l (cos 0) (19.10) 

1=0 

00 00 

J(2Z+l)i J e i *"P i (cose) = J (22 + l)Mi«r&lt;&lt;««-» l »&gt;Pi(cos 0) 

2=0 1=0 

Since these are true for all values of 6 and the Legendre polynomials are 
orthogonal to each other, the second of Eqs. (19.10) becomes 

Ai = e a ' 

Substitution of this into the first of Eqs. (19.10) gives for the scattering 
amplitude 

f(0) = (2ik)~ l £ (21 + l)(e 2i6 &lt; - l)P z (cos 0) (19.11) 

1 = 

1 G. N. Watson, "Theory of Bessel Functions," rev. ed., p. 128 (Macmillan, New 
York, 1944). 



120 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Thus the differential cross section is 

*(9) = l/WI 2 = p | X (2Z + V eiSlsin 8l Pl ( cos *&gt; f ( 19 - 12 ) 

1=0 

It is useful to note that Eqs. (18.10), (19.11), and (19.12), which 
refer to the asymptotic behavior of the wave function, are also valid 
when special relativity is taken into account. So long as we are dealing 
with motion in the center-of-mass coordinate system, which can be 
described by a function u of the relative coordinates, we can specify 
the scattering in this way in terms of the di, where ftk is the relative 
momentum. This is true even when the interaction cannot be described 
by a potential. 

TOTAL ELASTIC CROSS SECTION 

The total elastic cross section is the integral of Eq. (19.12) over the 
sphere. Because of the orthogonality of the Legendre polynomials, it 
contains no products of factors involving different values of I. 



= 2tt j*&lt;r(d) sin 6 dd = ^ 2 (21 + 1) sin 2 di (19.13) 



4w 

1=0 



The total cross section can also be related to /(0). It follows from 
the generating function (14.10) for the Legendre polynomials that 
P,(l) = 1 for all I, so that Eq. (19.11) gives for = 

/(0) = (2*)- 1 f (21 + l)(e™' - 1) 

1=0 

Comparison with Eq. (19.13) then shows that 

* = Ik {m ~ fm = T Im/(0) (19 ' 14) 

where Im denotes the imaginary part of the expression that follows. 
The physical interpretation of Eq. (19.14) is as follows: In order for 
scattering to take place, particles must be removed in an amount pro- 
portional to a from the incident beam, so that its intensity is smaller 
behind the scattering region (6 « 0) than in front of it. This can occur 
only by interference between the two terms in the asymptotic expression 
(18.10). Since such an interference term must be a linear function of the 
forward-scattered amplitude, we expect a relation of the general form of 
Eq. (19.14). An actual calculation of this interference term shows that 
Eq. (19.14) holds much more generally: when/ depends on &lt;f&gt; as well as on 
0, and when a includes inelastic scattering and absorption as well as 
elastic scattering. (See the end of Sec. 20.) 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 1» 

PHASE SHIFTS 

The angle Si is called the phase shift of the lih. partial wave, since according 
to (19.8) it is the difference in phase between the asymptotic forms of the 
actual radial function R t (r) and the radial function ji(kr) in the absence 
of scattering potential (U = 0). The phase shifts completely determine 
the scattering, and the scattering cross section vanishes when each of the 
81 is 0° or 180°. 

It should be noted that the derivation of (19.11) is valid whether or 
not there exists the assumed radius a beyond which U(r) is negligible, 
provided that U(r) falls off more rapidly than 1/r. However, the method 
of partial waves is most useful for computing scattering cross sections if 
such a radius a does exist, especially if ka is of the order of or less than 
unity. The reason for this is that the first and largest maximum of 
ji(kr) lies roughly at r = l/k; for r much smaller than this, ji is small 
and increases about as r l [see Eq. (15.7)]. Thus if a « l/k, ji will be 
very small where U is appreciable; then the Zth partial wave will hardly 
be affected by the potential, the phase shift Si will be very small, and 
the contribution to the scattering from that I will be negligible. It 
follows then that the scattering cross section consists of a series of terms 
extending from I = to a maximum I that is of the order of ka. Since 
the computation of the phase shifts is usually a tedious affair, the smaller 
the magnitude of ka, the easier the method is to apply. Thus this method 
of partial waves is most useful at low bombarding energies. 

It is interesting to note that the classical distance of closest approach 
of a free particle of mass n, velocity v, and angular momentum Ih to the 
origin is lh/nv = l/k. Thus the foregoing remarks are analogous to the 
statement that a classical particle is not scattered if it has sufficient 
angular momentum so that it does not enter the potential region r &lt; a. 

CALCULATION OF 81 

The phase shift Si is computed by fitting the radial wave function R t (r) 
for r &lt; a, which may have an analytic form and can always be found 
numerically if necessary, to the solution (19.7). The boundary condition 
at r = a is that (l/Ri)(dRi/dr) be continuous. Thus if y t is the ratio of 
slope to value of the interior wave function, we have that 

k[j'i(ka) cos Si — n[(ka) sin Si] _ 
ji(ka) cos Si — ni(ka) sin S t 

where the derivatives/, and n[ may be rewritten with the help of (15.10). 
Then S t is given by 

tanfr= t^l' yijli i%\ &lt; 19 - 15 &gt; 

kn\(ka) — yini(ka) 



122 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



Equation (19.15) can be used at once to obtain an approximate 
expression for Si when I is large and Si is expected to be small. In this 
case, yi will differ little from the ratio of slope to value of the solution 
in the absence of a scattering potential, so that we put 



I3i(ka) J 



M « 



3'iika) 



jiika) 



Equation (19.15) can be rewritten with the help of (15.9) as 
ei(ka) 2 ji 2 (ka) 



tan Si = 



€i(ka) 2 ji(ka)ni(ka) 



(19.16) 



(19.17) 



which is still exact. If now we make use of the power series expansion 
for.;'* from (15.7) when Z» (ka) 2 , and use (15.7) and (15.8) to estimate 
the order of magnitude of ni, the inequality in (19.16) becomes 



hi « 



l_ 
ka 



and (19.17) may be approximated as 

ei(ka) il+2 _ ei2 2l (l\) 2 (ka) 2l+i 



Si 



[(2Z+1)!!J 5 



[(2Z+1)!] 2 



(19.18) 



(19.19) 



Equation (19.19) can be used to verify the convergence of the sums 
over partial waves such as appear in (19.11). We use Stirling's formula 
to find the leading terms in In \S t \ when I is large, and we neglect terms of 
order In I and lower. 

In | £i| « In | C (| + 2Z[ln (ka) + 1 - In 2] - 2Hn I 

Thus even if |e*| has the maximum value indicated by (19.18), Si falls off 
like the inverse factorial of I (faster than exponentially), and the series 
that appear in the expressions for the scattering converge quite rapidly 
for large I. 

RELATION BETWEEN SIGNS OF Si AND V{r) 

It is apparent from (19.19) that, when I » (ka) 2 , Si has the opposite sign 
from ej. If now the potential-energy term V or U is positive, corre- 
sponding to forces that are mainly repulsive, Eq. (19.2) shows that the 
ratio of curvature to value for the radial wave function is more positive 
than in the force-free case. This means that the ratio of slope to value 
is more positive at r = a than is the case if U = 0. Thus a repulsive 
potential makes ej positive and Si negative. A negative phase shift means 
that the radial wave function is "pushed out" in comparison with the 
force-free wave function. 

In similar fashion, we see that a negative potential makes ei negative 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 



123 





(a) 



(b) 



Fig. 22 Graphs of the effects of (a) positive (repulsive) potential and (b) negative 
(attractive) potential on the force-free radial wave function rjo(kr) (dotted curves). 
The solid curves are xo(r). (Graphs supplied by J. L. Schwartz and H. M. Schey.) 



and 81 positive. This means that the radial wave function is "pulled in" 
by the attractive potential. 

This may be seen graphically by comparing rj (kr) and xo(r) when 
they are arbitrarily made to start out with the same slope at r = 0. 
Figure 22a and 6 show the results of numerical computations performed 
for repulsive and attractive square potentials, respectively. The units 
chosen are such that h = 1, m = \, and the length unit is one-fifth of the 
total length of the abscissa shown in the graphs. The potential has 
radius a = 1 and strength V = +2; the energy is E — 4, so that ka = 2. 
In each case the dotted curve is rj (kr) and the solid curve is xo(r). 



RAMSAUER-TOWNSEND EFFECT 

Figure 22b suggests that an attractive potential might be strong enough 
so that the 1 = partial wave is pulled in by just half a cycle and its 
phase shift is 180°. If this were the case, the corresponding term in the 
expression (19.11) for/(0) would vanish, and there would be no contribu- 
tion to the scattering. This situation is shown in Fig. 23 which, like 
Fig. 22, was computed numerically. Here a = 2, V = —5, and E — 1, 
so that ka = 2. The dotted curve is rj (kr), and the solid curve is xo(r) ; 
the potential width is also indicated. 

In such a situation, the possibility arises that ka can be small 
enough and the attractive potential strong enough so that all other phase 
shifts are negligibly small when 6 = 180°. The scattering amplitude 
f(d) then vanishes for all 6, and there is no scattering. This is the 
explanation 1 of the Ramsauer-Townsend effect, the extremely low mini- 

1 This explanation, suggested by N. Bohr, was shown to be quantitatively reasonable 
by H. Faxen and J. Holtsmark, Z. Physik 46, 307 (1927). 



"« QUANTUM MECHANICS 



Fig. 23 Graphs of rj (kr) (dotted curve) and X o(r) 
(solid curve) when the attractive square well potential 
is strong enough to make 8 = 180°. The two wave 
functions start out with the same slope at r = 0, and 
Xo(r) is pulled in by half a cycle. (Graphs supplied by 
J. L. Schwartz and H. M. Schey.) 



mum observed in the scattering cross section of electrons by rare-gas 
atoms at about 0.7-ev bombarding energy. A rare-gas atom, which 
consists entirely of closed shells, is relatively small, and the combined 
force of nucleus and atomic electrons exerted on an incident electron is 
strong and sharply defined as to range. It is clear that this minimum 
cross section will occur at a definite energy, since the shape of the wave 
function inside the potential is insensitive to the relatively small bom- 
barding energy whereas the phase of the force-free wave function depends 
rapidly on it. 

Physically, the Ramsauer-Townsend effect may be thought of as a 
diffraction of the electron around the rarer-gas atom, in which the wave 
function inside the atom is distorted in just such a way that it fits on 
smoothly to an undistorted wave function outside. This effect is anal- 
ogous to the perfect transmission found at particular energies in the one- 
dimensional problem considered earlier [see discussion of Eq. (17.5)]. 
Unlike the situation in one dimension, however, the Ramsauer-Townsend 
effect cannot occur with a repulsive potential, since ka would have to be 
at least of order unity to make S = — 180°, and a potential of this large 
range would produce higher I phase shifts. 

SCATTERING BY A PERFECTLY RIGID SPHERE 

As a first example of the method of partial waves, we compute the scatter- 
ing by a perfectly rigid sphere, which is represented by the potential 
V(r) = + oo for r &lt; a, and V(r) = for r &gt;.a. The solution for r &gt; a 
is just Eq. (19.7). The boundary condition, obtained in Sec. 8, that 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 125 

u(a,6) = 0, is equivalent to the requirement that all the radial functions 
vanish at r = a. The phase shifts may then be obtained by setting 
either Ri(a) given by (19.7) equal to zero, or y t in (19.15) equal to infinity: 

tan 8 t = ^r W- 20 ) 

niika) 

The calculation of the scattering is particularly simple in the low- 
energy limit: ka = 2ira/X «C 1. Then substitution of (15.7) into (19.20) 
gives as an approximation for the phase shifts 

tan 8l ~ - (2Z+1)[V-1)M] 2 (19 ' 21) 

Thus 8i falls off very rapidly as I increases, in agreement with (19.19). 
All the phase shifts vanish as &amp;— » 0; however, the 1 = partial wave 
gives a finite contribution to the scattering because of the factor 1/fc 2 
that appears in (19.12) and (19.13). We thus obtain 

&lt;r(6) « a 2 a « 4tto 2 (19.22) 

The scattering is spherically symmetrical, and the total cross section is 
four times the classical value. 

In the high-energy limit (ka ^&gt; 1), we might expect to get the classi- 
cal result, since it is then possible to make wave packets that are small in 
comparison with the size of the scattering region, and these can follow 
the classical trajectories without spreading appreciably. This corre- 
sponds to the ray limit in the wave theory of light or sound. The dif- 
ferential scattering cross section is rather difficult to find, and we only 
indicate the computation of the leading term in the total cross section. 
Substitution of (19.20) into (19.13) gives 

. _ £ V .%+y&lt;ff, (19.23) 

We can make use of asymptotic expansions of Bessel functions that are 
valid when the argument is large and the order is smaller than, of the 
order of, and larger than the argument. 1 The calculation shows that 
most of the contribution to the sum in (19.23) comes from 

I &lt; (ka) - C(ka) i 

where C is a number of order unity; the leading term here is £(ka) 2 . 
The other two parts of the sum, for (ka) — C(ka)* &lt; I &lt; (ka) + C(ka) h 
and for I &gt; (ka) + C(ka) i , each contribute terms of order (ka)* and 

1 Watson, op. cit., chap. VIII. 



126 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

hence may be neglected in the high-energy limit. Thus 

a « 2ira 2 (19.24) 

which is twice the classical value. 1 

The reason for the apparently anomalous result (19.24) is that the 
asymptotic form of the wave function is so set up in Eq. (18.10) that in 
the classical limit the scattering is counted twice : once in the true scatter- 
ing (which turns out to be spherically symmetric as it is in the classical 
problem) and again in the shadow of the scattering sphere that appears 
in the forward direction, since this shadow is produced by interference 
between the incident plane wave e ikz and the scattered wave f(8)e ikr /r 
[see also the discussion of Eq. (19.14)]. However, so long as ka is finite, 
diffraction around the sphere in the forward direction actually takes place, 
and the total measured cross section (if the measurement can be made so 
that it includes the strong forward diffraction peak) is approximately 
27ra 2 . 

SCATTERING BY A SQUARE WELL POTENTIAL 

As a second example of the method of partial waves, we consider the 
somewhat more complicated problem of the scattering from the spheri- 
cally symmetric square well potential illustrated in Fig. 13, Sec. 15. 
The interior (r &lt; a) wave function that is finite at r = is seen by 
analogy with Eq. (15.11) to be 

*,(r) = Bdtiar) a = [ 2 » (Jg + Fo) ]* (19.25) 

Thus the phase shifts are given by Eq. (19.15), where the ratio of slope 
to value of the Zth partial wave at r = a is 

7, = #^ (19.26) 

In the low-energy limit (ka &lt;K 1), substitution of (15.7) into (19.15) 
gives for the first two phase shifts 

tan d « — -z — ; 

1 + Y00 (19.27) 

3 2 + yia 

1 The next term has been calculated by S. I. Rubinow and T. T. Wu, J. Appl. Phys. 
27, 1032 (1956); the result is 

„ T 0.99615 I 

" 2 "" ' + «r + ' •■ 



47TC 2 1 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 127 

Unless y a = — 1 or y x a = — 2, both of these vanish as k — &gt; 0. As with 
the rigid sphere, however, the I = partial wave gives a finite contribu- 
tion to the scattering because of the factor 1/fc 2 that appears in (19.12) 
and (19.13). From Eq. (19.26), we see that y a = aa cot aa — 1, so 

that 

/tan^aV (19 28) 

The scattering is spherically symmetrical. 

The conclusion reached here and in connection with the rigid sphere 
that the low-energy scattering is substantially independent of bombard- 
ing energy and angle of observation is almost always valid for any 
potential that has a finite range. Exceptions can arise, as pointed out 
after Eq. (19.27), if any one of the yi is such that the denominator of 
the expression for tan h is very small. In such a situation, the Zth 
partial wave is said to be in resonance with the scattering potential; then 
it usually dominates the scattering. 

RESONANCE SCATTERING 

An approximate expression for the resonance cross section can be obtained 
by making use of the fact that y t decreases linearly with increasing a 
when a is sufficiently close to a = (2/iFo/^ 2 )*. Increasing a causes the 
interior wave function to bend over more rapidly and so decreases the 
ratio of slope to value at r = a. Now 

a = (a„ 2 + A; 2 )* « «o + ^ 

when k is small, so that we can write to lowest order in k 

yia « y t °a — bi(ka) 2 

where 7i° is the value of yi when a = a , and h is a positive number of 
order unity. 1 Substitution into (19.27) and then into (19.12) gives for 
the leading term in the differential cross section, in the two cases for 
which the value of I for the partial wave that is in resonance is and is 1, 

'&lt;« " (r. - 6,wV+ W ' = ° (19 - 29&gt; 

//lX 9a 2 cos 2 (ka)* , 1 /mom 

«*&gt; " (f, - bjw + (*»)' ' = 1 (19 ' 30&gt; 

We have put f c = 7o°a ■+■ 1 and f x = yi°a + 2; for resonance, |f | and 
|f i| are small compared with unity. It is easy to show then that (19.29) 

1 It can be shown that the lih partial wave is exactly in resonance at zero bombarding 
energy when yi°a — — (Z + 1) ; in this case bi = £ for all I. Compare with footnote 1, 
page 88. See also B. W. DoWns, Am. J. Phys. 30, 248 (1962). 



128 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



is a monotonically decreasing function of ka; however (19.30) has a sharp 
maximum at ka « (f 1/61)* if f 1 is positive, and a much lower maximum 
at ka « ^Ifil&amp;i) 1 if ft is negative. 

If we make use of the relation f = a a cot a a, we see from (19.29) 
that a suitable approximation for the total cross section when the I = 
partial wave is in resonance is 

* ~ k 2 + a 2 cot 2 cc a (1931) 

It is apparent that the 1 = partial wave is in resonance at low bombard- 
ing energies whenever a a is approximately an odd multiple of ir/2, so 
that V a 2 « ir 2 h 2 /8n, 9T 2 h 2 /$n, etc. The discussion of Eq. (15.3) shows 
that these are just the values of F a 2 for which new energy levels with 
I = appear. It is true quite generally that a potential well (not neces- 
sarily square) that has an energy level nearly at zero exhibits a resonance 
in the low-energy scattering of particles with the same I value (not neces- 
sarily zero) as the energy level. From a physical point of view, we can 
say that an incident particle that has nearly the right energy to be bound 
by the potential tends to concentrate there and produce a large distortion 
in the wave function and hence a large amount of scattering. 

Sharp resonance maxima in the low-energy scattering like that found 
above for I = 1 with positive f 1 can appear for any I value except / = 0, 
provided that the potential well is not quite deep or broad enough to con- 
tain a new energy level of that angular momentum (this corresponds in 
the case of the square well to having f x small and positive) . We can think 
of such a potential physically as containing a virtual energy level slightly 
above zero. Although a discrete energy level cannot exist with positive 
energy, the positive "centrifugal potential" 1(1 -f- l)fi 2 /2nr 2 [see the dis- 
cussion of Eq. (14.18)] for I &gt; acts as a potential barrier that impedes 
the escape of a particle that is in the virtual energy level. Figure 24 
illustrates this barrier, which is characterized by a small transmission at 
low energies in the same way as is the barrier of Fig. 14 [see the discus- 



Effective 
potential 
energy 



1(1 + l)fi 2 
2/xr 2 




Fig. 24 The effective potential 
energy [V(r) plus "centrifugal 
potential"] for I &gt; 0, when V = 
for r &gt; a. The dashed portion 
for r &lt; a depends on the shape 
of V. The effective potential 
barrier (r &gt; a) resembles the 
barrier of Fig. 14 in that it has a 
small transmission for E slightly 
greater than zero. 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 129 

sion of Eq. (17.7)]. Thus the virtual level has a kind of transient exist- 
ence and produces a greater distortion of the incident wave function at 
its energy than at neighboring energies. In the limit of zero energy, it 
can be shown that the transmission of the centrifugal barrier is zero 
(see Sec. 34), so that the particle cannot leak out if I &gt; 0. Resonance 
at zero energy thus leads to a true bound state if I is not zero. 

ANGULAR DISTRIBUTION AT LOW ENERGIES 

When the bombarding energy is small but not zero, the partial wave 
I = 1 may have an observable effect on the scattering. If only 5 and 5i 
are appreciably different from zero, Eqs. (19.12) and (19.13) become 

&lt;r(0) = p [sin 2 d + 6 sin S sin Si cos (Si — 5 ) cos 



+ 9 sin 2 5i cos 2 9] (19.32) 



&lt;r = p- (sin 2 So + 3 sin 2 5i) 



In the absence of resonance, we see from Eqs. (19.27) and (19.32) that 
the ratio of the contributions to the total cross section of the partial waves 
I = 1 and I — is of order (ka) 4 . However, the ratio of the largest angle- 
dependent term in the differential cross section (which is proportional to 
cos 6) to the constant term is of order (ka) 2 . 

Thus the partial wave 1 = 1 manifests itself in the angular distribu- 
tion at a lower energy than that at which it becomes significant in the 
total cross section; this is because of its interference with the stronger 
partial wave I = 0. For example, if 5 = 20° and 5i = 2° at a particular 
bombarding energy, the partial wave I = 1 contributes only 3 percent to 
the total cross section but it makes the forward scattering (0 = 0°) 3.5 
times as great as the backward scattering (0 = 180°). 



20DSCATTERING BY COMPLEX POTENTIALS 

It has been assumed thus far that the potential energy V (r) is real. This 
is a natural assumption since V has been taken over from classical 
mechanics in accordance with Eq. (6.14). However, there are situations 
in which it is convenient to make use of a complex potential as a highly 
abbreviated description of a much more complicated physical system. 
For example, neutrons may be scattered elastically or inelastically from 
atomic nuclei. In the first case the nucleus is left in its original state, 
and the sum of the kinetic energies of neutron and nucleus is the same 
before and after the collision. In an inelastic collision the nucleus is 
left in an excited state, and the quantity Q, defined in connection with 



130 -' QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Eq. (18.5), is negative. Inelastic scattering and the absorption of the 
neutron to form a different nucleus are both processes in which neutrons 
are taken out of the incident beam and do not reappear as part of the 
scattering amplitude f(d,&lt;f&gt;). 

So far as the effect of these other processes on the elastic scattering 
is concerned, a useful approximation consists in regarding the interaction 
between neutron and nucleus as being represented by a complex potential. 1 
It is usually called the optical-model potential, in analogy with the long- 
standing use of a complex refractive index for discussing the optical 
properties of partially absorbing media. This section describes the 
modifications in the theory thus far developed that are necessitated by 
the assumption that V may be complex. 

CONSERVATION OF PROBABILITY 

It was shown in Sec. 7 that the position probability density P(r,t) and 
the probability current density S(r,i), denned by Eqs. (7.1) and (7.3), 
obey a differential conservation relation. The derivation of this relation 
made essential use of the assumption that V is real. If we now assume 
that V is complex and write it for future convenience in the form 

V = V R - iV T 

where Vb and Vj are real, a repetition of the derivation shows that the 
conservation relation is replaced by 

^ + V.S(M) = -^P(r,0 (20.1) 

Since P is nonnegative, the right side of this equation acts as a source 
of probability if V T is negative and as a sink if Vi is positive. For the 
physical reasons discussed above, we shall always assume that V r &gt; 0. 
If there is a region in which V • S = 0, Eq. (20.1) shows that P decays 
exponentially in time, P &lt;* e~ 2v ' tlh , so that the wave function is expected 
to have the time dependence ^ &lt;* e ( ~ iE ~ y ' )tlh . 

Integration of Eq. (20.1) over a fixed volume ft bounded by the 
surface A leads to 



f Q P(i,t) d s r = ~ f A SndA - | J Q V Z P d 3 r (20.2) 



in place of Eq. (7.4). If ^ is sufficiently well bounded at large distances 
so that the surface integral vanishes when Q, is the entire space, we see 

1 It was first used for this purpose by H. Feshbach, C. E. Porter, and V. F. Weisskopf, 
Phys. Rev. 96, 448 (1954). For reviews of the subject, see P. E. Hodgson, "The 
Optical Model of Elastic Scattering" (Oxford, New York, 1963); A. L. Fetter and 
K. M. Watson in "Advances in Theoretical Physics" (Academic, New York, 1965). 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 13X 

that the normalization integral decreases in time. This is to be expected 
since particles are being absorbed. 

It is more interesting to apply Eq. (20.2) to a scattering situation. 
In this case we require \f/ to be stationary, so that it has the time depend- 
ence \p a e~ iEtlh . The discussion of Eq. (20.1) then shows that there is 
no region in which 7/^0 and V • S = 0. The left side of (20.2) is now 
zero, and as 9, becomes large the first term on the right side, — J A S n dA, 
becomes the total inward flux of particles entering ft from very large 
distances. In the discussion of Eq. (19.6) it was pointed out that the 
vanishing of this integral implied that the particles scattered outward 
are supplied by the incident plane wave. In the present situation we 
see that this integral is the flux of particles removed from the incident 
plus elastically scattered wave by the complex potential, provided that 
^ is normalized to a plane wave of unit amplitude at infinity. It may 
therefore be set equal to ixr abs , where v is the relative velocity and &lt;r aba is 
the sum of the total absorption and inelastic cross sections. We thus 
obtain the relation 

*ab. - j| / W| 2 d&gt;r (20.3) 

Although this equation is valid whenever \p is properly normalized, it is 
useful only if \f/ is known in the region where Vi j* 0. 

COMPLEX PHASE SHIFTS 

If the potential is spherically symmetric, the method of partial waves 
can be employed whether or not V is complex. The discussion of Eq. 
(19.5) showed that the phase shifts are real if the potential is. The 
same argument shows that di is generally complex if V is complex, and 
so we put 

Si = ai + i$i 

where a t and &amp; are real, and also define 

Si = e 2i8 « = 



The derivation of the expression for the scattering amplitude is unchanged, 
so that Eq. (19.11) becomes 

f(d) = (2ik)~ l X (2/ + 1)0S, " l)P.(cos 0) (20.4) 

j=o 

The differential elastic scattering cross section is |/(0)| 2 , and the total 



132 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

elastic cross section is 

a* = 2t Jj \f(d)\ 2 sin 6 de 

CO 

= ¥ 2 ^ 2l + 1)(1 ~ 2e ~ m cos 2&lt;Xl + e-4ft) 



1 = 



= ¥ 1 (21 + W l ~ S ^ (20-5) 

1 = 

This reduces to Eq. (19.13) when ft = 0, as expected. 

The absorption cross section can also be expressed in terms of the 
phase shifts. As pointed out above, it is equal to — tr 1 f S n dA, where 

it is now convenient to choose the surface A to be a large sphere of radius 
r: 

1 /"2ir fr 

o^bs = hm r 2 / / S r sin dd dd&gt; 

v r-*&lt;» Jo Jo. V 

= lim 27rr 2 f* S r sin d0 (20.6) 

The radial flux is 



2inY 



a .», Jl/ du* ^ 

dr dr j 



Differentiation of Eq. (19.1) gives 



du 
dr 



= ii|iP,(cos,) + (I) 

1 = \ / 



1 = 

so that Eq. (20.6) becomes 



Oabs 



" X Z o 2TTT \* a7 " IT x j (2a7) 

evaluated at r = oo . The asymptotic form (19.8) shows that 

/ * &lt;hu _ dx? \ 

V ' dr dr Xl )T^ 

[ —£- [sin (kr - %lir + a t - ifa) cos (At - $lw + «z + »ft) 

- cos (kr — ^lir + ai — ifa) sin (kr — ^lir + a t + i/3,)] 

= i^ sin ( - 2#,) = - 4££ S i n h 2)8, 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 133 

Substitution of this and the expression |4*| 2 = (21 + l) 2 e-^« into Eq. 
(20.7) yields 

"abs = ^y (2Z+l)(l-e-&lt;*) 

1 = 

= JT (2Z+1)(1- W) (20.8) 

1 = 

We thus expect that ft &gt; 0. 

The total cross section is denned to be the sum of the elastic and 
absorption cross sections. From Eqs. (20.5) and (20.8) it is 



at„t = =? J (21 + 1)(1 - e-*&gt; cos 2a t ) 
i-o 

00 

= ¥ 2 (2Z + 1)[1 ~ Re (Sl)] (20,9) 

1 = 

where Re denotes the real part of what follows. 

ASYMPTOTIC RELATIONS 

Three interesting and useful relations, the reciprocity theorem, the 
generalized optical theorem, and the optical theorem, can be derived 
from a consideration of the asymptotic behavior of the scattering wave 
function. We now obtain them in the order just given, although this 
is not the historical sequence. 1 

It is convenient to rewrite Eq. (18.10), with A = 1, in a form that 
does not emphasize the special role played by the z axis: 

u k (i) ^* exp (ik • r) + r l f(k r ,k)e ikr (20.10) 

Here the plane wave is incident along the direction of k, and the amplitude 
/(k r ,k) corresponds to scattering from k to k r , which is a vector that has 
the magnitude k and the direction of r. For another solution that corre- 
sponds to the initial direction — k', 

w_ k ,(r) ^ exp (-*V • r) + r" 1 /^, -k')e*' (20.11) 

Since w k (r) and w^r) both satisfy Eq. (18.8) with the same value of E, 
it follows that 

M_ k 'V 2 w k - u k V 2 M_ k , = (20.12) 

whether V is real or complex. 

1 The optical theorem [Eq. (20.23) below] was first derived in this way by E. Feenberg, 
Phys. Rev. 40, 40 (1932). This approach was subsequently generalized to yield the 
other two theorems by R. Glauber and V. Schomaker, Phys. Rev. 89, 667 (1953). 



134 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Equation (20.12) may be integrated over a large spherical volume 
fi of radius r, and this integral can be transformed into an integral over 
the surface of the sphere: 

J a (M_ k 'V 2 M k - w k V 2 w_ k ') d 3 r 

[2* /v / dw k dW_k'\ . 

= r Jo Jo \ u -* -&amp; - «fc -^ ) am r dd r d&lt;f&gt; r = 

where r , &lt;f&gt; r are the polar angles of r with respect to some arbitrarily 
chosen polar axis. Substitution of the asymptotic forms (20.10) and 
(20.11) gives in the limit of large r 



■rjr{* 



"A; (cos + cos e')e ikrlcOBe ~ coae '^ 

+ I y (1 + cos 0') - ^l/(k r&gt; k)e*'&lt; 1 -«»»'&gt; 

- I j (1 - cos 0) - ^ /(k r , -kO^H- — •&gt; J sin r d0 r &lt;fy r = 

where is the angle between k and r, and 0' is that between k' and r. 
The first term in the integrand can be seen to vanish on integration over 
the directions of r, since for every pair of angles 0, 0' there is a canceling 
pair 7r — 0', ir — 0. The 1/r 2 terms in the integrand, as well as other 
terms of order 1/r 2 that were ignored in the expansion (20.10), can be 
neglected for a reason that will become clear from the discussion of (20.14) 
below. 

We are thus left with the equation 

tkr J** f* [(1 + cos flO/Ckr.k)*** 1 -— •'&gt; 

- (1 - cos 0)/(k r&gt; -k')« ttr(I+oo ' #) ] sin r dd r d&lt;f&gt; r = (20.13) 

which is to be evaluated in the limit r — &gt; &lt;» . In the first term we can 
shift the polar axis from its original arbitrary choice to the direction k' 
and thus replace the variables of integration r , &lt;f&gt; r by 0', &lt;f&gt;'. Then, with 
w = cos 0', we consider the integral 

r j_ x F(w,^')e* r(1 - i0) dw (20.14) 

in the limit of large r, where F(w,&lt;f&gt;') = ik(l + w)/(k r ,k). Integration 
by parts gives 

I F(w,&lt;t&gt;')eW-«» |\ - t f 1 1 f£ e*'a-«» dw 
k l-i k J-i dw 

It is apparent that further partial integrations lead to successively higher 
powers of r in the denominator, so that only the first term need be kept 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 135 

in the limit r -* «&gt; . This is the reason why the above-mentioned terms 
of order 1/V 2 could be neglected. We thus find that the limit of (20.14) 



is 



l [F(l,*') - F(-l,4&gt;')e™'] (20.15) 

With the above form for F(w,&lt;f&gt;'), we see that F(-l,&lt;f&gt;') = 0. How- 
ever the second term of (20.15) could have been dropped in any event, 
since the factor e 2ikr oscillates about zero as r -* » . This is an applica- 
tion of the method of stationary phase, which is sometimes useful in 
obtaining asymptotic expressions for integrals. 1 In this case the point 
w — 1 is called the stationary phase point, since the phase of the integrand 
of (20.14) is stationary as w approaches unity. 

RECIPROCITY THEOREM 

The stationary phase point of the first term in (20.13) is cos B' = 1 or 
0' = 0. This corresponds to r being along k' or to the substitution of 
k' for k r in the scattering amplitude /(k r ,k) . Further, the integrand does 
not depend on &lt;£', so that the &lt;/&gt;' integration only introduces a multiplica- 
tive factor 2t. In similar fashion, the second term in (20.13) has its 
stationary phase point at cos 6 = - 1 or 6 = x, so that k r is replaced by 
-kin/(k r ,-k'). 

We thus obtain the reciprocity theorem 

/(k',k) = /(-k,-k') (20.16) 

which states that the amplitude for scattering from k to k' is equal to 
that for scattering from the reversed final direction — k' to the reversed 
initial direction — k. It is important to note that this theorem is valid 
whether V is real or complex. 

It often happens that V(r) = 7(-r), so that V possesses space- 
inversion symmetry (see Sec. 29). Then all vectors in the scattering 
problem may be inverted without altering the physical situation, and 
we have that 

/(-k,-k') =/(k,k') (20.17) 

Combination of Eqs. (20.16) and (20.17) yields a slightly specialized 
reciprocity theorem: 

/(k',k) = /(k,k') (20.18) 

GENERALIZED OPTICAL THEOREM 

The procedure followed in the two preceding subsections can now be 
repeated, starting with w£ in place of w_ k «. Then Eq. (20.12) is replaced 

» See, for example, C. Eckart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 20, 399 (1948). 



136 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

by 

Wk'V 2 Mk - w k V 2 w£ + ^ Vru$&gt;u k = 
Integration over a large spherical volume fl of radius r leads to 

r ° T /o" («* ^ - * isr) sta * * **- + f /„ "*** * - o 

Substitution of asymptotic forms like (20.10) in the first term then gives 
in the limit of large r 



I * f | ik(cos + cos $') e ikr ^ os *- co » »'&gt; 



+ 
+ 



ik 1 ~\ 

- (1 + cos 6') - ± /(kr.k)*** 1 -""') 



(1 + cos 0) + l\f*(k r&gt; k')e- ik ^-^^ 



+ ~/*(k r ,k')/(k r ,k)| sin r dd r d+r 

+ W / F/W *' Wk rf 3 r = (20.19) 

where the volume integral is now over all space. 

As before, the first term integrates to zero, and the terms that are 
products of 1/r 2 and exponentials can again be neglected. The two 
remaining exponential terms can be evaluated by the method of stationary 
phase. The first term has its stationary phase point at the same place: 
cos 0' = 1 or k r = k'. However, the second term now has its stationary 
phase point at cos = 1 or k r = k, rather than at k r = -k as before; 
there is also a sign change that arises from the altered sign in the exponent. 
Equation (20.19) thus becomes 

-47r/(k',k) + 47r/*(k,k') + 2ik p J o 7*(k r ,k')/(k r ,k) sin r d0 r d&lt;t&gt; r 

+ W f VlU * Uk d * r = ° ( 20 - 2 °) 

As it stands, this relation is not useful, since the last term is difficult 
to evaluate and in general has no simple physical interpretation. We 
thus consider first the case in which V is real, so that V r = 0. Equation 
(20.20) is then called the generalized optical theorem: 

\T / 7*(kr,k')/(k,k) sin r dd r d&lt;t&gt; r - 2p [/*(k,k') - /(k',k)] 

(20.21) 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 137 

If V possesses inversion symmetry, Eq. (20.18) may be used to simplify 
this relation: 

f Q 2 ' / o 7*(k',k r )/(k r ,k) sin d r dO r d&lt;f&gt; r = ^ Im [/(k',k)] (20.22) 

It is important to note that Eqs. (20.21) and (20.22) are valid only if V 
is real. 

Equation (20.22) may be used in conjunction with the Born approx- 
imation (see Sec. 38) in the following way. The Born approximation 
gives an extremely simple approximate expression for the scattering 
amplitude / which is of first order in V, and this / is real when V is real. 
Thus Eq. (20.22) enables us to calculate the imaginary part of / that is 
of lowest order in V and shows that it is actually of second order. 

OPTICAL THEOREM 

There is one situation in which the volume integral in Eq. (20.20) has a 
simple physical interpretation, that is, when k' = k. Then, in accord- 
ance with (20.3), 

jF/WkWk d 3 r = ^hv&lt;r &amp;he 

since the normalization of w k agrees with that used earlier for ^. Then 
Eq. (20.20) becomes 

f* /o* l-K k " k )l 2 sin e * ddr d * r + ***» = t Im U&amp;'W 

The first term on the left side is the total elastic cross section &lt;r eh so that 
the left side is equal to a tot . 

We thus obtain the optical theorem: 

&lt;r tot = crei + *abs = y Im [/(k,k)] (20.23) 

This is a generalization of Eq. (19.14) in that it applies as well when V 
is neither spherically symmetric nor real. In actuality, the optical 
theorem is even more generally valid than the preceding sentence indi- 
cates, since it can be derived without reference to a potential. All that 
is needed is the asymptotic form of the probability current density 
S(r,t), obtained by substituting (20.10) into (7.3). Then the integral 
of its radial component over an infinite sphere is proportional to the 
rate of disappearance of particles from the plane plus scattered wave 
and hence is proportional to o- ab s- Equation (20.23) then follows at once 
from application of the method of stationary phase. The optical theorem 
is also valid when special relativity is taken into account. 

It is apparent that /(k,k) enters into the optical theorem through 



138 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

an interference between the plane and scattered waves in (20.10). This 
interference is characterized by the phase factor e ikra ~ eo ' 9) , which, as a 
function of 0, oscillates rapidly about zero for large r except in the neigh- 
borhood of = 0. Thus the asymptotic probability current density 
consists of a part from the plane wave alone that is everywhere in the 
direction of k, a part from the scattered wave alone that is always radially 
outward and integrates to a el , and a part that arises from interference. 
The last is appreciable only when kr(l — cos 0) &lt; 1 ; for large kr and 
small 0, this is equivalent to &lt; (kr)-*. Within this angular region 
the scattered wave interferes destructively with the plane wave, thus 
removing from the plane wave just enough of the incident flux to account 
for absorption and inelastic scattering and for elastic scattering at all 
but infinitesimal angles. 

In the asymptotic region, this angular range of interference may be 
thought of as the remnant of the shadow cast by the scatterer. This 
shadow remnant has a diameter d ~ r(kr)~* ~ (r/k)*. The true shadow 
cannot extend beyond a distance r„ such that the interfering or imaginary 
part of the forward-scattered amplitude, Im[/(k,k)]/r 8 , is of the order of 
the plane wave amplitude, which is unity, so that r, ~ Im[/(k,k)] ~ ka tot . 
At this limiting distance, the shadow diameter is d ~ (r s /&amp;)* ~ (""tot)*- 
Now &lt;r t ot is of the order of the square of the diameter of the scatterer in 
the short wavelength or classical limit. Thus scatterer and shadow are 
roughly of the same size at the limiting distance at which the shadow 
exists, as would be expected. 1 



21DSCATTERING BY A COULOMB FIELD 

It was noted in Sec. 19 that the coulomb field is an exceptional scatterer 
so far as the application of the method of partial waves is concerned. 
If V(r) = ZZ'e 2 /r for a collision between particles of charges Ze and Z'e, 
it is easily seen that Eq. (19.3) becomes asymptotically 

Xlif) oc e ±»(*r-nlnr) (21.1) 

Here n = nZZ'e 2 /h 2 k = ZZ'e 2 /fiv, where v is the relative velocity and /z is 
the reduced mass. Thus the radial solutions never approach the sinus- 
oidal free-particle solutions, since there is always a logarithmic contribu- 
tion to the phase at great distances that cannot be neglected. Although 
it is still possible to obtain a solution of this scattering problem in spheri- 
cal coordinates (this is given below), the phase shifts 5/ introduced in 
Sec. 19 are altered in meaning. This section presents the analytical 

1 For an extension of the discussion in this paragraph and its relation to the uncertainty 
principle, see L. I. Schiff, Prog. Theoret. Phys. (Kyoto) 11, 288 (1954). 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 139 

work in outline and quotes the principal results from more extended 
treatments. 1 

PARABOLIC COORDINATES 

So long as &lt;r(9) for a pure coulomb field is all that is desired, it is simpler 
to work with the separation of the wave equation in parabolic coordinates 
(see Sec. 16) than in spherical coordinates. The reason for this is that 
the desired solution depends almost entirely on the variable £ defined in 
Eq. (16.25) and not on the other two variables 77 and 4&gt;. It is apparent 
that the solution will not involve &lt;f&gt;, because of the axial symmetry of the 
problem; if now the incident plane wave term e ik * is taken out as a factor, 
it can be made plausible that the rest of the solution does not involve rj. 
We put 

u e = e««/ ( 2L2 &gt; 

where u e represents the complete coulomb wave function (incident plus 
scattered wave). Now u e must contain a part whose dominant asymp- 
totic behavior is of the form r~V* r , but no part that goes like r - x e~ ikr 
[see Eq. (18.10)]. Since an expression e ik 'f(r — z) can be of this form, 
whereas an expression e ik "f(r + z) cannot, we anticipate that the function 
/ appearing in (21.2) will depend only on £ = r — z. 

We substitute Eq. (21.2) into Eq. (16.26), after replacing Z by 
—ZZ', and remember that E &gt; 0. The differential equation for / is 
then 

tje + (1 - iH) %- nkf==0 (2L3) 

The confluent hypergeometric equation 

which has the solution F(a,b,z), is equivalent to Eq. (21.3) if we put 
/({) = CF(-in,l,ikt) (21.5) 

where C is a constant. 

1 W. Gordon, Z. Physik 48, 180 (1928) ; N. F. Mott and H. S. W. Massey, "The Theory 
of Atomic Collisions," 2d ed., chap. Ill (Oxford, New York, 1949). For the mathe- 
matical background, see E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson, "A Course of Modern 
Analysis," 4th ed., chap. XVI (Cambridge, London, 1935). 



140 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

CONFLUENT HYPERGEOMETRIC FUNCTION 

The solution of Eq. (21.4) that is regular at z = can be written as a 
power series: 

T(a + s)T(b)z» 



F(abz) = y T{a + s)TWz ' 
na,0,z) Z r(a)r&lt;6 + a)r(l + .) 



1 + Ml + 6(6 + 1)2! + ' • • &lt; 21 - 6 &gt; 

It is convenient to put F(a,b,z) = TFi(a,6,«) + W 2 (a,b,z), where TFi and 
TT 2 are separately solutions of Eq. (21.4). An asymptotic expansion for 
F can then be obtained from the following relations'. 

W!(a,b,z) = T( l ( ^ a) (-z)- a g(a, a - 6 + 1, -z) 

W 2 (a,b,z) = ^J- e*z°- b g(l - a,b - a, z) (21.7) 

aCaB:)- -II afi I «(« + 1)^0 + 1) , 

The solution of Eq. (21.4) that is irregular at the origin can be taken to 
be 

G{a,b,z) = iWi{a,b,z) - iW 2 (a,b,z) (21.8) 

We shall require the irregular solution for problems in which the coulomb 
field does not extend in to r = 0. 

The asymptotic form of the coulomb wave function can be obtained 
from Eqs. (21.1), (21.5), and (21.7). The result through terms of order 
r~ 1 is 

Uc r^» r(l + in) T [ i+ ik(r - Z) J 

+ /- 1 / c (0)e i &lt;*'~» ln2 *'&gt;j (21.9) 

where 1 

f (a) = r (l + in) e -»"i°(8i°H») 
M; iT(- in) 2k sin 2 $6 

€ -in In (sin J J«)+»&gt;+2ii,, (^1 • 1") 



2k sin 2 \Q 
t) = arg T(l + in) 
1 The real quantity &lt;f&gt; — arg z is defined by the relation z = \z\ e'*. 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 141 

SCATTERING CROSS SECTION AND NORMALIZATION 

The f c term on the right side of Eq. (21.9) represents the outgoing 
scattered wave, since it is the only term in which the factor r~ 1 e ikr appears. 
The first term in Eq. (21.9) similarly corresponds to the incident "plane" 
wave; the multiplicative factor —n 2 /ik(r — z) can be ignored in the 
asymptotic region. Both the incident and scattered waves are distorted 
at infinite distances by logarithmic phase factors. In accordance with 
Eq. (18.11), the differential scattering cross section is 

%&amp;) ^sec^d (21.11) 

This is just the formula obtained by Rutherford from classical dynamics, 
which was verified experimentally for the collisions of alpha particles 
(helium nuclei) with heavier nuclei. It should be noted, however, that 
the angle-dependent part of the phase factor in the scattered amplitude 
fc(6) given in Eq. (21.10) can manifest itself in a nonclassical way when 
the colliding particles are identical (see Sec. 40). 

If the incident beam is normalized to unit flux, the constant C 
must be chosen to be 

C = tr*r(l + tn)e-*»* 

so that the coulomb wave function is 

u e = tr*r(l + iri)e-l nrr e ikT F(— in,l,ik£) 

= ir»r(l -j- in)e-^e ikr ^ 9 F{-in, 1, 2ikr sin 2 }6) (21.12) 

Then the particle density at r — is found from the power series expan- 
sion (21.6) to be 

MO) |» = |C7| 2 = tr i|r(l + *n)|»«r»' 

2nir 



v(e 2n ' — 1) 
For small collision speeds (\n\ » 1), Eq. (21.13) tells us that 

|w c (0)| 2 « — — attractive case, n &lt; 

|w c (0)| 2 ~ e~ 2nr repulsive case, n &gt; 



(21.13) 



(21.14) 



The second of Eqs. (21.14) is of some practical interest. The expo- 
nential is the dominant factor in the rate of reactions between positively 
charged nuclei at low bombarding energies, when the nuclear radii may 



142 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

be assumed small enough so that the colliding nuclei have to tunnel 
through the coulomb potential barrier to zero distance in order to initiate 
a reaction. In this case e~ 2 ' zz ' ei,hv is called the Gamow factor 1 and is the 
dominant term in the rate of many nuclear reactions at low bombarding 
energies. 

SOLUTION IN SPHERICAL COORDINATES 

In nuclear collision problems, such as that of the scattering of protons 
of several million electron-volts energy in hydrogen, the departures from 
the coulomb law of interaction at small distances between the colliding 
particles can affect the scattering cross section. Such problems can be 
treated by a modification of the method of partial waves, developed in 
Sec. 19, in which an expansion in spherical harmonics is made for the 
pure coulomb field, and modifications introduced for the first few I values. 
In order to apply such a technique, we require first a solution for the 
pure coulomb scattering in spherical partial waves. 
We put 

u e = V ifc(r)Pi(cos d) (21.15) 

1 = 

where the radial wave equation is 

?»("*) + [*'- ? r-^*- (2116) 

If we substitute Ri(r) = ^e^fiir), the equation f or fi becomes 

r j2j + [2ikr + 2(1 + 1)] &amp; + [2ik(l + 1) - 2nk]f t = (21.17) 

This is equivalent to the confluent hypergeometric equation (21.4) and 
has as its solution that is regular at r = 

fi(r) = QF(l + 1 + in, 21 + 2, -2ikr) (21.18) 

The asymptotic form of (21.18) can be found from (21.7) and gives for 
the radial wave function at great distances 

^ (r) ^ (2fc)T(i + 1 + in)kr Sm &lt;* ~^~ n ln 2kr + *&gt; 

(21.19) 

where m = arg r(/ + 1 + in). 

The coefficients Ci must be determined so that the partial wave 
expansion (21.15) is identical with the solution (21.12) in parabolic 

i G. Gamow, Z. Physik 61, 204 (1928); R. W. Gurney and E. U. Condon, Phys. Rev. 
33, 127 (1929). 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 143 

coordinates. Because of the orthogonality of the Legendre polynomials, 
we have the relation 

Ri(r) = ^-^ fj Pi(cos 0)u c (r,0) sin dd (21.20) 

where u c (r,d) is given by the second of Eqs. (21.12). The complete 
evaluation of this integral can be avoided by making use of the fact that 
we know all about the function Ri(r) except the constant multiplying 
factor Ci. Ci can then be found by matching the known form of Ri(r) 
to Eq. (21.20) near r = 0; it is 

r = (2ik) l e-l™T(l + 1 + in) 
1 v*(2l) ! 

We thus obtain as an alternative expression to (21.12) 
T(Z + 1 + in) 



Ue = v-h-l" ^ (20 1 &lt; 2 ^ r )' e * r 



1=0 



(20! 
F(l + 1 + in, 21 + 2, -2»fcr)Pi(cos 6) (21.21) 

It is also possible to expand f c (B), given by Eq. (21.10), in a series 
of Legendre polynomials; the result is 

oo 

MB) = A V (2Z + Oe^Ccos 6) (21.22) 

1=0 

This seems surprising at first, since f e (6) does not appear to vanish in the 
limit n — » 0, which corresponds to no interaction; we obtain instead 

lim/ e (0) = ^ ^ ( 2Z + l)^i(cos 0) 

n-&gt; 1=0 

The series on the right can be summed to give 

oo 

J (21 + l)P,(cos 0) = 45(1 - cos 6) (21.23) 

1 = 

Equation (21.23) can be verified by multiplying both sides by P,'(cos 6), 
integrating sin d0 from to tt, and remembering that the integral on 
the right is carried to but not through the point = 0. We thus find 
that f e (0) does indeed vanish in the limit n — &gt; for ?* but that it 
has a 5-function singularity at = such that 

lim f 8 °M0) sin d0 = - \ (21.24) 

n-&gt;0 J° K 



144 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

for any finite do. Equation (21.24) is easily verified by direct integration 
of (21.10), provided that the value of the integral at the lower limit is 
interpreted to be the average of its value at e as € —&gt; 0. This peculiar 
behavior arises from the long-range character of the coulomb field. No 
matter how weak the interaction is made, it always causes particles that 
pass at very great distances to be deflected through very small angles. 

MODIFIED COULOMB FIELD 

If the actual potential deviates from the coulomb form only at small 
values of r, we expect in analogy with the partial wave treatment of 
Sec. 19 that only the first few terms in the sum (21.21) will be altered. 
Since each partial radial wave function must be a solution of (21.16) 
outside of the potential anomaly, the only change we can make in the 
function f t and still have it a solution of (21.17) is to add in some of the 
irregular solution G(l + 1 + in, 21 + 2, -2ikr) defined by (21.8). The 
manner in which G is to be added in is determined by the requirement 
that the complete wave function shall represent asymptotically a coulomb 
incident plus scattered wave, plus an extra outgoing scattered wave. 

We must, therefore, substitute for each F term in (21.21) a linear 
combination of F and G in which the amount of the ingoing term W% is 
not changed. Such a combination is 

e*»(F cos Si + G sin Si) = Wie 2a &lt; + W 2 

The modified wave function, which is a solution of the wave equation 
outside of the potential anomaly, can then be written 

T(l + 1 + in) 



= Uc + »-»«-»»* 2 (a)! ( 2ikr y eikr 



1 = 



(e 2iS &gt; - l)W x {l + 1 + in, 21 + 2, -2ikr)Pi(cos 8) (21.25) 
The asymptotic form of u m is 

oo 

u m &gt; tr* £ (2Z + 1)*V ( *' W (kr)' 1 



1 = 



sin (kr -ihr-n In 2kr + m + 8i)Pi(cos 0) (21.26) 

As shown in connection with Eq. (19.5), if V is real each term on the 
right side of (21.26) must be a real function of r, except for complex 
multiplying factors, so that the Si must be real. 

The additional phase shifts S t can be found by matching each partial 
radial wave in Eq. (21.25) to the interior solution at the edge of the 
potential anomaly, in just the same way as the phase shifts were found 
in Sec. 19. Although in Sec. 19 the phase shifts Si represented the 
departure of the wave function from that of a free particle, they here 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 145 

represent the departure from the wave function of a particle scattered 
by a pure coulomb field. 1 It can be shown from Eq. (21.25) that the 
asymptotic form of u m may be written in the form of (21.9), where f c (6) 
is replaced by 

00 

/*(*) = MO) + J k~ l (2l + l)e*(*r«+»«&gt; sin MMcos 0) (21.27) 

1 = 

The differential scattering cross section is just |/ m (0)| 2 and in general 
contains interference terms between the coulomb scattered amplitude 
f c (e) and the extra terms that are determined by the Si. 

It is important to note that these 8i are not equal to those that 
would be obtained from the potential anomaly in the absence of the 
coulomb field. 

CLASSICAL LIMIT FOR A PURE COULOMB FIELD 

As was discussed in Sec. 12, we expect the results of quantum and classical 
theory to coincide whenever it is possible to construct wave packets that 
follow the classical trajectory without spreading appreciably and are small 
enough so that the forces are sensibly constant over their dimensions. 
The smallest spread of a wave packet during a time interval t was found 
there to be of order (fit/fi)* or (hd/nv)* = (Xrf)*, where d = vt is the dis- 
tance traveled by the packet in the time t, and X = \/2ir = h/fiv is the 
reduced wavelength for the relative motion. Thus the classical theory 
can be used when (Xd!)* « d, or (rf/X)* ^&gt; 1, where d is the distance over 
which the force varies by an appreciable fraction of itself. For a repulsive 
coulomb field, d is of the order of the classical distance of closest approach 
\ZZ'e*/£(iV 2 \. This also provides a useful estimate for an attractive cou- 
lomb field, since in all the collisions, except the relatively few for which 
the particles are scattered through large angles, they never get closer than 
this distance from each other. 

The condition for the validity of the classical theory is then 

ZZ'e* 



\i = 



hv 



»i 



Large n implies that the angle-dependent part of the phase of / c (0) given 
by Eq. (21.10) varies rapidly with 0, so that these rapid oscillations in 
the scattering amplitude should have little effect on the scattering when 
the colliding particles are identical (see Prob. 6, Chap. 10). 

It is interesting to note that for the coulomb field the classical limit 
is approached for small v, whereas for potentials that have a finite range 

1 The computation of the Si in Eq. (21.25) requires knowledge of G at small r; useful 
formulas have been given by F. L. Yost, J. A. Wheeler, and G. Breit, Phys. Rev. 49, 
174 (1936). 



146 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

0. such as are discussed in Sec. 19, the classical limit is approached when 
(a/X) 1 ^&gt; 1, that is, for large v. This is because the "size" \ZZ'e 2 /nv 2 \ of 
the coulomb field increases more rapidly than X = %/ixv as v decreases. 

PROBLEMS 

1. Show that the coefficients of scattering by a one-dimensional square well poten- 
tial (like Fig. 14 except that V &lt; 0) are given by Eqs. (17.5) if the sign of V is 
changed there and in the expression for a. Discuss the dependence of transmission 
coefficient on E in this case. 

2. Show that Eqs. (18.4) and (18.7) are valid for a general binary collision if y is 
given by (18.5); make use of conservation of energy and mass. 

3. Show that, when a particle of mass wii collides elastically with a particle of mass 
m 2 that is initially at rest, all the recoil (mass m 2 ) particles are scattered in the forward 
hemisphere in the laboratory coordinate system. If the angular distribution is 
spherically symmetrical in the center-of-mass system, what is it for m 2 in the labora- 
tory system? 

4. Express the scattering wave function (19.1) outside the scattering potential (but 
not necessarily in the asymptotic region) as the sum of a plane wave and an infinite 
series of spherical Hankel functions of the first kind [see Eqs. (15.12)]. From this 
expression and the discussion of Eqs. (15.13), show that the scattered wave is purely 
outgoing, even inside of the asymptotic region. 

5. Two objects, A and B, have irregular forms and are identical in size and shape. 
Object A is filled with a positively infinite (impenetrable) potential and scatters 
particles of mass m. Object B is made of metal and has a certain electrostatic 
capacity C when isolated from other objects. Derive expressions for the differential 
and total cross sections for elastic scattering of particles of mass m by object A in the 
limit k —* 0, in terms of the capacity C of object B. 

6. Find a general expression for the phase shift produced by a scattering potential 
V(r) = A /r 2 , where A &gt; 0. Is the total cross section finite? If not, does the diverg- 
ence come from small or large scattering angles, and why? What modifications are 
necessary in the calculation if A &lt; 0? Are any difficulties encountered in the 
latter case? 

7. What must Voa* be for a three-dimensional square well potential in order that 
the scattering cross section be zero at zero bombarding energy (Ramsauer-Townsend 
effect)? Find the leading term in the expressions for the differential and total cross 
sections for small bombarding energy. Show that partial waves with I &gt; 2 can be 
neglected. 

8. State clearly the assumptions that go into the derivation of Eq. (19.31), and 
verify that it is a suitable approximation for the total cross section at low bombarding 
energies when the 1 = wave is in resonance. 

9. Make use of Eq. (19.31) and the result of Prob. 5, Chap. 4, to obtain an approxi- 
mate expression for the total scattering cross section by a particular potential in terms 
of the bombarding energy E and the binding energy e of a particle in that potential, 
when E and e are small in comparison with Vo- 

10. Compute and make a polar plot of the differential scattering cross section for a 
perfectly rigid sphere when ka = £, using the first three partial waves (Z = 0,1,2). 
What is the total cross section in this case, and what is the approximate accuracy of 
this result when the three terms are used? 



CONTINUOUS EIGENVALUES: COLLISION THEORY 147 

11. Calculate the elastic scattering and absorption cross sections for a potential of 
the form V(r) = -V (l + ik), r &lt; a; V(r) = 0, r &gt; a. V and £ are positive; 
assume that k and £ are very small and that there is neither a resonance nor a Ram- 
sauer-Townsend effect. Keep only the leading term in k and £ in each cross section. 

12. Show that the following inequality holds for any potential: 

r*&lt;o) &gt; Q^y 

The quantity on the left side is the differential elastic scattering cross section in the 
forward direction. 

13. Protons of 200,000-ev energy are scattered from aluminum. The directly back- 
scattered intensity (0 = 180°) is found to be 96 percent of that computed from the 
Rutherford formula. Assume this to be due to a modification of the coulomb poten- 
tial that is of sufficiently short range so that only the phase shift for I = is affected. 
Is this modification attractive or repulsive? Find the sign and magnitude of the 
change in phase shift for I = produced by the modification. 



6 
Matrix Formulation of 
Quantum Mechanics 



In the four preceding chapters the Schrodinger wave equation was 
developed and its solutions obtained in some cases of physical interest. 
We now turn to a different formulation of quantum mechanics, in which 
dynamical variables such as the coordinates, momentum components, 
and energy of a particle appear explicitly in the equations of motion of 
the system without their having to multiply or differentiate a wave func- 
tion. The classical equations are just of this structure, and so it might 
be expected that there would be a closer resemblance between the classical 
and quantum formalism here than in the Schrodinger theory. 

This is actually the case; the principal formal difference is that the 
quantum-dynamical variables do not obey the commutative law of 
multiplication. It is convenient to represent such noncommutative 
dynamical variables, which are often simply called operators, as matrices. 
Matrix theory provides an especially flexible representation scheme, since 
there are an arbitrarily large number of ways of choosing the rows and 
columns of a matrix, all of which are of equal validity. It is because of 
the close formal resemblance between quantum matrix mechanics and 



148 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 149 

classical dynamics that this was historically the first formulation of 
quantum theory to be discovered, by Heisenberg in 1925. * 

In this chapter we first review briefly the more important properties 
of matrices and then show their connection with quantum theory and 
their usefulness in particular problems. 

22D MATRIX ALGEBRA 

We restrict our discussion at first to matrices that have a finite number 
of rows and columns, and then indicate how the results obtained can 
be taken over to matrices that have an infinite number of rows and 
columns. 2 

MATRIX ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION 

A matrix is a square or rectangular array of numbers that can be added 
to or multiplied into another matrix according to certain rules. We 
denote a matrix by a capital letter, such as A, and the numbers or 
elements that make it up by the same letter with subscripts, such as 
A k i; here, k designates the row and I the column in which the matrix 
element A k i appears. Two matrices can be added when they have the 
same rank, i.e., the same number of rows and the same number of columns. 
Addition is commutative: 

A + B = B + A (22.1) 

If the sum matrix is called C, then 

C H = A kl + B kl (22.2) 

A matrix A can be multiplied from the left into a matrix B if the 
number of columns of A is equal to the number of rows of B; then the 
product matrix C has the number of rows of A and the number of columns 
of B. 

C = AB C M = J A^B^ (22.3) 

m 

where the summation is over the subscript m, which denotes the columns 
of A and the rows of B. It follows at once from Eqs. (22.2) and (22.3) 

1 W. Heisenberg, Z. Physik 33, 879 (1925) ; M. Born, W. Heisenberg, and P. Jordan, 
Z. Phys. 35, 557 (1925). The connection between quantum matrix mechanics and 
the wave equation was established by E. Schrodinger, Ann. Physik 79, 734 (1926), 
and C. Eckart, Phys. Rev. 28, 711 (1926). The historical development has been 
reviewed by S.-I. Tomonaga, "Quantum Mechanics," chap. 5 (Interscience, New 
York, 1962). 

* For a fuller discussion, see J. von Neumann, "Mathematische Grundlagen der 
Quantenmechanik," chap. II (Springer, Berlin, 1932; reprinted by Dover, New York). 



150 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

that the distributive law of multiplication is valid. 

A(B + C) = AB + AC (22 .4) 

Also, the associative law of multiplication is seen to be valid: 

A(BQ = (AB)C (22.5) 

where the left side means that A is multiplied from the left into the 
product of B and C, and the right side means that the product of A and B 
is multiplied from the left into C. The product (22.5) is written simply 
as ABC and, from (22.3), has the explicit expression 

D = ABC D kl = £ A km B nn C nl (22.6) 

It is clear from Eq. (22.3) that AB is not, in general, equal to BA ; 
thus the commutative law of multiplication is not generally valid. 

NULL, UNIT, AND CONSTANT MATRICES 

For an arbitrary square matrix A, the null matrix O is denned by the 
equations 

OA = O AO = O (22.7) 

from which it follows that all the elements of O are zero. If A is not 
square, the elements of O are still all zero, but the O's that appear at 
different places in (22.7) do not all have the same numbers of rows and 
columns. 

The unit matrix 1 is defined by 

1A = A Bl = B (22.8) 

for arbitrary matrices A and B. From Eqs. (22.8) it follows that 1 is a 
square matrix whose rank (number of rows or columns) equals the num- 
ber of rows of A or the number of columns of B. Moreover, 1 must have 
unit elements along its principal diagonal (A; = I) and zeros elsewhere, so 
that the elements of 1 equal the Kronecker symbol 5« introduced in 
Sec. 10. 

The product of a number c and a matrix A is the matrix cA that 
results from multiplying each element of A by c. Thus if we define a 
constant matrix C to be a multiple of a unit matrix so that each non- 
vanishing element is c instead of unity, then 

cA - CA where C w = c5« (22.9) 

are the matrix elements of the constant matrix C. 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 1S1 

TRACE, DETERMINANT, AND INVERSE OF A MATRIX 

The trace of a matrix, often called the spur or the diagonal sum, is the 
sum of the diagonal elements of the matrix : 

tr (A) = J A kk (22.10) 

k 

It is easily shown, with the help of (22.3), that the trace possesses the 
cyclic property 

tr (ABC • • • EF) = tr (BC • • • EFA) (22.11) 

The determinant of a square matrix, denoted by det (A), is found 
from the usual rule for the computation of the determinant of a square 
array of numbers. If A and B are square and of the same rank, then 

det (AB) = det (A) ■ det (B) (22.12) 

A matrix may or may not possess an inverse A -1 , which is defined 
by the relations 

A A- 1 = 1 A- 1 A = 1 (22.13) 

A is said to be nonsingular if it possesses an inverse, and singular if it 
does not. If A is nonsingular and of finite rank, it can be shown to be 
square, and either of Eqs. (22.13) implies the other (see Prob. 2). The 
kl element of A- 1 is just the cofactor of A H divided by det (A) ; thus A is 
singular if its determinant vanishes. It is readily verified that for non- 
singular matrices A, B, C 

(ABC)- 1 = C-'B-'A- 1 (22.14) 

HERMITIAN AND UNITARY MATRICES 

The hermitian adjoint A* of a matrix A is the matrix obtained by inter- 
changing rows and columns and taking the complex conjugate of each 
element; thus if 

B = A* then B kl = Af k (22.15) 

It is readily verified that the hermitian adjoint of the product of a series 
of matrices is the product of their adjoints in the reverse order: 

(ABcy = c*b*a* (22 16) 

A matrix is hermitian or self-adjoint if it is equal to its hermitian 
adjoint; thus H is a hermitian matrix if 

H = W (22.17) 

Evidently only square matrices can be hermitian. 



1S2 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

A matrix is unitary if its hermitian adjoint is equal to its inverse; 
thus U is a unitary matrix if 

W = U- 1 or if 'UW = 1 and WU = 1 (22.18) 

Unitary matrices of finite rank must be square, and then either of the 
latter two of Eqs. (22.18) implies the other. 

TRANSFORMATION AND DIAGONALIZATION OF MATRICES 

We define the transformation of a square matrix A into a square matrix 
A' by a nonsingular matrix S, by the following equation: 

SAS- 1 = A' (22.19) 

It is evident then that &amp; _1 transforms A' back into A. 

The form of a matrix equation is unaffected by transformation. 
Thus the equation 

AB + CDE = F 
may be transformed into 

SABS- 1 + SCDES- 1 = SFS- 1 
which is equivalent to 

SAS- 1 ■ SBS- 1 + SCS- 1 ■ SDS- 1 • SES~ l = SFS- 1 
or to 

A'B' + C'D'E' = F' 

where the primes denote transformed matrices. This invariance of 
matrix equations with respect to transformations makes it possible to 
work with any convenient transformation of a set of matrices without 
affecting the validity of any results obtained. It should also be noted 
that tr (-4) and det (A) are unchanged by transformation. 

A square matrix is diagonal if it has nonvanishing elements only 
along the principal diagonal (k = I). The diagonal elements are then 
called the eigenvalues of the matrix. It is easily seen that the nth power 
of a diagonal matrix is also diagonal and has as its eigenvalues the nth 
powers of the eigenvalues of the original matrix. The matrix A in Eq. 
(22.19) is said to be diagonalized by the matrix S if the matrix A' that 
results from the transformation is diagonal, so that A' kl = A' k Ski- To 
find A' explicitly, we multiply (22.19) through on the right by S, where 
we assume that such an S exists. 

SA = A'S (22.20) 

The set of linear algebraic equations that are obtained by writing the 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 153 

elements of Eq. (22.20) for a particular row k and all columns I is 

I S^A^ = A'jSu or J 5i.(i- - K d ml ) = (22.21) 

to m 

where A' k is a particular eigenvalue of A' and the subscript m is summed 
over from unity to the rank N of the matrix A. 

Now (22.21) may be regarded as a set of N homogeneous algebraic 
equations for the transformation matrix elements Skm, where k is fixed. 
The necessary and sufficient condition that these equations have a solu- 
tion is that the determinant of their coefficients vanish, or that the deter- 
minant of the square matrix (A mt — A' k S m i) be zero. This provides a 
single algebraic equation, called the secular equation, which is of order 
N and has N roots A' k . Thus the eigenvalues of the diagonal matrix A' 
resulting from A by transformation are the same no matter how A is 
diagonalized, except perhaps for the order in which they are arranged; 
for this reason they are also called the eigenvalues of the original non- 
diagonal matrix A. A' and A are said to be degenerate when two or 
more eigenvalues are equal. 

It is not difficult to see that, in general, equations that involve both 
A and A + are not invariant with respect to transformation unless the 
transformation matrix S is unitary. 

FUNCTIONS OF MATRICES 

A function of a matrix can often be defined in terms of a power series. 
Thus, if f(z) is a polynomial in the number z, then /(.A) is the same poly- 
nomial in the matrix A. With an infinite series, some attention must 
be paid to convergence. It is apparent that, if A can be diagonalized 
and is put in its diagonal form A' = SAS~ X , then S will also transform 
f(A) into the diagonal form f(A') and the fcth eigenvalue of f(A') is 
simply f(A' k ). Thus, if the power series f(z) converges when z is equal to 
each eigenvalue of A, the power series /S -1 /(A')/S = f(A) is well defined. 
This last may provide a useful definition of f(A) even when f(z) cannot 
be represented by a power series. 

Exponential and trigonometric functions of matrices can be repre- 
sented by power series that converge for all finite values of their argu- 
ments and hence are well defined. It is easily seen, for example, that 
(e A ) f = e A \ so that e iH is unitary if H is hermitian. 

Another useful result is the relation (see Prob. 3) 

det(e A ) = e*'^ (22.22) 

MATRICES OF INFINITE RANK 

The rules (22.2) and (22.3) for addition and multiplication of matrices 
may be taken over in an obvious way for matrices that have an infinite 



154 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

number of rows and columns, provided that the infinite sum in (22.3) 
converges. We sometimes deal with matrices that have a nondenu- 
merably infinite number of rows or columns or both; in this case, one or 
both of the matrix subscripts becomes a continuous variable, and the 
usual summation over a subscript is replaced by integration over this 
variable. We do not consider these possibilities in detail here but simply 
assume that all reasonable results can be taken over from finite- to 
infinite-rank matrices without difficulty. 1 The statement that a her- 
mitian matrix of infinite rank is square means that its rows and columns 
are labeled in the same way. A unitary matrix of infinite rank need 
not be square. Its rows and columns can be labeled differently; for 
example, the number of rows may be denumerably infinite and the 
number of columns nondenumerably infinite. 

We are concerned primarily in quantum mechanics with hermitian 
and unitary matrices, mainly of infinite rank. A fundamental theorem 
that we shall assume without proof is that any hermitian matrix can be 
diagonalized by a unitary transformation; a corollary of this theorem is 
that the resulting eigenvalues of the hermitian matrix are unique, 
except perhaps for the order in which they are arranged. Starting from 
this theorem, it is not difficult to show (see Prob. 1) that the necessary 
and sufficient condition that two hermitian matrices can be diagonalized 
by the same unitary transformation is that they commute (matrices A 
and B commute if AB = BA). 

It also follows from this theorem that the eigenvalues of a hermitian 
matrix are real. If the S and A in (22.19) are unitary and hermitian, 
respectively, that equation can be rewritten 

SAS* = A' (22.23) 

The hermitian adjoint of Eq. (22.23) is, from (22.16), 

SAS* = A't 

Since then A'* = A', this shows that the hermitian property is 
maintained during transformation by a unitary matrix. If A' is diagonal 
as well as hermitian, it follows from (22.15) that its eigenvalues are real. 
It is easily seen that the converse is also true: a matrix that can be 
diagonalized by a unitary transformation and has real eigenvalues is 
hermitian. 

It is important to note with matrices of infinite rank that both 
of Eqs. (22.13) must be valid in order for A~ l to be the inverse of A. 
Similarly, both of the latter pair of Eqs. (22.18) must be valid if U is 
to be unitary. 

1 A more thorough discussion of this point and a proof of the following theorem are 
given by von Neumann, loc. tit. 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 155 

23DTRANSFORMATION THEORY 

The appearance of matrices in quantum mechanics can be connected in 
a simple way with the solution of the Schrodinger equation (8.2). In 
this section we adopt the hamiltonian notation and justify it in detail 
in Sec. 24. We rewrite Eq. (8.2) as 

Hu k (r) = E k u k (t) (23.1) 

where the subscript k denotes the different members of the complete 
orthonormal set of energy eigenf unctions u k (r) and their corresponding 
eigenvalues E k . k specifies the energy and also distinguishes between 
degenerate eigenf unctions; it thus includes both E and s of Eq. (10.7). 
For example, A; represents k x , k u , and k t in the case of plane waves and 
n x , n u , and n t in the case of three-dimensional harmonic-oscillator 
eigenf unctions. 

The hamiltonian or energy operator H is given by 

H - £ + F « - - £ v ' + nt) (23 - 2&gt; 

where we shall assume throughout this chapter that V is real, so that the 
E k are also real. In accordance with the discussion of Sec. 8, k may be 
a discrete or a continuous variable or (as in the case of a hydrogen atom) 
discrete over part of its range and continuous over the rest. We shall 
use the generalized summation symbol S or S* to denote both a summa- 
tion V over discrete values of the subscript k and an integration jdk over 

the continuous part of its range. We shall also use the subscript "op" 
whenever it seems desirable to distinguish between an operator like 
(23.2) and its equivalent matrix. 

UNITARY MATRIX W 

Suppose that we have a second complete orthonormal set of functions 
v„(r), which are eigenf unctions of some operator ft with real eigenvalues 



«^(r) = cw(r) (23.3) 

12 might, for example, be the momentum operator (6.13) with eigen- 
f unctions (11.4) or (11.11), or the hamiltonian for some potential other 
than that of Eq. (23.2). The t&gt;„ can be expanded in terms of the u k with 
expansion coefficients w klt : 

v„(r) = SkW klt u k (t) (23.4) 

Both sides of this equation may be multiplied by u*(t) and integrated 



156 x QUANTUM MECHANICS 

to obtain 

™*m = J&lt;(rK(r) dh (23.5) 

The completeness of the set u k was used to obtain Eq. (23.4), and its 
orthonormality to obtain Eq. (23.5). In similar fashion, u k may be 
expanded in terms of the v„. : 

«*(r) = SAW (23-6) 

We can now show that the matrix W, of which w kli are the elements, 
is unitary by calculating a typical matrix element of WW* : 

(WW*)* = S„uv&lt; = S„K(rK(r) d*rW(t')ui(t') d 3 r' 

= J"R*(r) 5 3 (r - r')«i(r') d 3 r dh' = K*(r)w,(r) d*r (23.7) 

Use has been made here of the closure property of any complete ortho- 
normal set of functions, discussed in connection with Eq. (10.11), which 
now takes the form 

SMt)v*(t') = « 3 (r - r') (23.8) 

The last integral on the right side of Eq. (23.7) is either a Kronecker 8 
symbol or a Dirac 5 function according as k is one of a discrete or contin- 
uous set of subscripts. In either case, this integral is equivalent to an 
element of the unit matrix, so that WW* = 1. In similar fashion, it can 
be established that 

(WW),, = S*w*&gt;*„ = (1),, (23.9) 

TRANSFORMATION OF THE HAMILTONIAN WITH W 

We have shown that W is a unitary matrix that relates two sets of func- 
tions Uk and y„. It can also be used to transform the hamiltonian matrix 
H', which we define through its matrix elements 

H' k i = jut(T)H op Ui(T) d 3 r = E k b kl or E k d(k - I) (23.10) 

where H op is the differential operator (23.2). Use has been made here 
of Eq. (23.1) to show that H' is in diagonal form with diagonal elements 
that are just the energy eigenvalues E k . Another hamiltonian matrix 
H" can be constructed by using the functions u M : 

H", = !v*(r)H op v,(r) d 3 r (23.11) 

This is not in diagonal form. 

We now follow the definition (22.19) and transform H" with W: 

{WH"W*) kl = S&amp;w klt H'; v wt 

= S„S,K(r&gt;„(r') &lt;*V 

.K(r)ff p»,(r) d 3 rK(r")w&lt;(r") d*r" 
= S!!ut(t')S 3 (t f - r)#„ p S 3 (r - r")«i(r") dV d 3 r d 3 r" 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 157 

where H op operates only on the variable r to its right. The integration 
over r" may be performed by taking H op outside of the r" integral: 

J# p 5 3 (r - r") u,(r") d*r" = H op f8 3 (i - r") u,(r") d 3 r" = H op ui(i) 

We thus obtain 

&lt;WH"W) U = K(r)tf, p i*,(r) d 3 r = #1, 

This may be written without explicit use of subscripts as the matrix 
equation 

WH"W = H' (23.12) 

Thus we see that W is the unitary matrix that transforms the non- 
diagonal matrix H" into the diagonal form H'; also, W f transforms H' 
into H". 

Another way of putting what has been done thus far is to state that 
the process of solving the Schrodinger equation (23.1) is completely 
equivalent to the process of diagonalizing a particular matrix. The 
matrix H" may be calculated from the operator H op of Eq. (23.2) by 
using any complete orthonormal set of functions w„(r) that is convenient. 
If this diagonalization can be carried through, both the diagonal form 
H', which consists of the energy eigenvalues E k , and the diagonalizing 
matrix W are obtained in the process. Once W is known, the eigen- 
functions w*(r) may be obtained by using Eq. (23.6). 

It is interesting to note that W is not necessarily a square matrix; 
that is, its rows and columns may be labeled differently. For example, 
the functions w* may be the eigenfunctions of a three-dimensional har- 
monic oscillator, which form a completely discrete set, and the functions 
Vp may be momentum eigenfunctions, which form a completely contin- 
uous set. However the hamiltonian matrices H ' and H" are both square. 

It is apparent that H' and H" are hermitian, since their eigenvalues 
are real. The discussion of Sec. 10 developed the interpretation that the 
eigenvalues of any operator that represents a physically measureable 
quantity are real, since they are the only possible results of precise 
measurement of that quantity. Thus a dynamical variable that is 
physically measurable is represented by a hermitian matrix when it is 
in diagonal form; it then follows from the discussion of Eq. (22.23) that 
any unitary transformation of this matrix is also hermitian. 

TRANSFORMATION OF THE HAMILTONIAN WITH U 

There is no need to think of the operator H given in Eq. (23.2) as having 
a fundamentally different status from the matrices H' and H" defined 
by Eqs. (23.10) and (23.11). The natural matrix form for H ov is one in 
which the rows and columns are labeled by coordinates r and r'. The 



158 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

corresponding unit matrix is taken to be 

&lt;1)„. = 5 3 (r - r') 

in analogy with the right side of Eq. (23.7) when k is one of a continuous 
set of subscripts. A diagonal matrix can then be written as/(r) 5 3 (r — r'), 
where /is any multiplicative function of r but not a differential operator; 
it might, for example, be the potential energy. We then expect the 
matrix form of the hamiltonian operator to be 

H„, = H op 5 3 (r - r') (23.13) 

where on the right side H op operates only on the variable r. We shall 
refer to this matrix as H whenever the subscripts are not written explicitly. 
It is important to note that H„&gt; is not diagonal, since H op is not a multi- 
plicative function but contains differential operators in its kinetic-energy 
part. Equation (23.13) has nonvanishing matrix elements that are 
infinitesimally removed from the diagonal r = r'. 

Equation (23.12) shows that W transforms H" into H' . It is of 
interest to inquire what the unitary matrix U is that transforms H, as 
defined by (23.13), into H': 

UHW = H' (23.14) 

This equation may be written HW — WH', which becomes, when 
expressed in matrix elements, (HW) Tk = (WH') Ik , or 

Sr&gt;H t AW) t &gt; k = Si(W) tl H' lk (23.15) 

Here Sr* is the same as fd 3 r'. On substitution from Eq. (23.13), the left 
side of (23.15) becomes 

jH 0V 6*(t - t'KWU dV = fT.,Ja«(r - 0(^)rt dh' 

- H op (W) tk 

where H op operates on the r dependence of (?/*),*• The right side of 
Eq. (23.15) may be rewritten by making use of (23.10), so that it becomes 
(U 1 ) Ik E k . Thus Eq. (23.15) is equivalent to 

H op m* - E k (W) tk 

Comparison with the Schrodinger equation (23.1) shows that (W) tk must 
be identified with the energy eigenf unction w*(r). 

We are thus led naturally to an extension of the formalism according 
to which a complete orthonormal set of functions u k (r) may be regarded 
as a unitary matrix U: 

U kt = ut(r) (23.16) 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 159 

In this particular case, U transforms H into H' in accordance with Eq. 
(23.14). It is easily verified that U is, in fact, unitary; for example, 

{UW) U = SjJtoiW)* = K(r)ii,(r) dh = (1) H 
by orthonormality, and 

(UW)„. = Sk(W) tk U kt , = S*w*(rK(r') = (1)„. 
by closure. 

TRANSFORMATION OF THE HAMILTONIAN WITH V 

The set of functions v„(r) can, in accordance with Eq. (23.16), also be 
regarded as a unitary matrix V: 

F„ r = iv*(r) 

where again the unitarity of V follows from the orthonormality and 
closure of the set t&gt;„(r). As would be expected, transformation of H 
with V gives H": 

VHV* = H" (23.17) 

The pv matrix elements of the two sides of this equation are precisely 
the two sides of Eq. (23.11). 

The matrix H can be eliminated between Eqs. (23.14) and (23.17) 
as follows: 

H = V*H"V 

W = UHW = UVW'VW 
This agrees with Eq. (23.12) if we set 

W - UV* (23.18) 

In matrix-element form this is 

W*„ = SrE/*r(Ft) r „ 

or 

w*„ = Jw*(r)tv(r) d'r 

which is the same as Eq. (23.5). Equation (23.18) can also be written 
in the forms F f = WW and W = V*W f , which are the same as Eqs. 
(23.4) and (23.6), respectively. 

REPRESENTATIONS OF OPERATORS 

The three hamiltonian matrices H , H', H" are referred to as different 
representations of the same operator H ov . Each representation is char- 
acterized by the quantity whose eigenvalues are used to label the rows 



160 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

and columns of the matrix (r, E k , «,,, or, more concisely, r, k, n). Thus 
H, H', and H" are the hamiltonian in the coordinate, energy, and ft 
representations, respectively. A unitary matrix whose rows and columns 
are labeled by the eigenvalues of A and B, respectively, transforms an 
operator from the B to the A representation. For example, U trans- 
forms any operator from the coordinate to the energy representation, 
and C7 f from the energy to the coordinate representation. In similar 
fashion, V transforms from the coordinate to the ft representation, and 
W from the ft to the energy representation. Thus application of V 
followed by W transforms from the coordinate to the ft representation 
and then to the energy representation; the overall effect is represented 
by the product WV, since the transformation farthest to the right acts 
first. Equation (23.18) shows that WV = U, as it should since U trans- 
forms from the coordinate to the energy representation. An operator 
is diagonal in the representation in which the rows and columns are 
labeled by the eigenvalues of that operator; thus H' is diagonal since it 
is the hamiltonian expressed in the energy representation. 

The remarks in the preceding paragraph can be illustrated by apply- 
ing them to the operator ft. In the coordinate representation it is 
expected to have the form 

ft n ' = flop 5 3 (r - r') (23.19) 

where on the right side ft op operates only on the variable r. We call 
this matrix ft and find its transformation into the energy representation, 
which should be UQW: 

(UQW) U = SrSr' UiAsiWU 

= /&lt;(r)ft op Wi(r) d 3 r 
as expected. Similarly, transformation to the ft representation gives 

(vav%„ = avCi),,, 

which is in diagonal form. 

A USEFUL IDENTITY 

Equation (23.19) can be used to write 

Oop**(r) = /Qrr'^(r') d*r' 
where ^(r) is an arbitrary function. Then 

Jtf (r)[0*to(r)] dhr - J7^(r)0„^(r') d«r dV (23.20) 

where ^«(r) is another arbitrary function. We are not necessarily assum- 
ing that the ^ a (r) are members of a complete orthonormal set of functions. 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 161 

Since Q rt ' is a matrix with rows and columns labeled by r and r' and hence 
is not the same as the operator G op , we can rearrange terms on the right 
side of Eq. (23.20) to give 

/[/(a'W.Cr) d*r]*Mr') d 3 r' 

where (ii t ) r 'r = ^ is the r',r element of the matrix S2 f that is the hermitian 
adjoint of £2. Equation (23.19) can also be used to define the hermitian 
adjoint operator flop 1 in accordance with 

' "o P V«(r) = impair') dV 

Thus Eq. (23.20) may be rewritten 

Jtf(r)[Oopfc(r)] dh = JPW*.(r)]*fc(r) dh (23.21) 

Equation (23.21) is sometimes useful, since an integral of this type 
may be more conveniently evaluated when op operates on one of the 
functions &amp;«, ^j rather than on the other. The partial integrations in 
Eqs. (7.9), (7.10), and (12.3) are examples of the application of Eq. 
(23.21). In those cases, fl op is a differential operator, and its coordinate 
representation involves derivatives of 8 3 (t — x'). However, $2 op need not 
be of this specialized type but might have nonvanishing matrix elements 
for finite r — r\ In any event, if fi op is to represent a physically measur- 
able dynamical variable, it must be hermitian, in which case fl op t can be 
replaced by $2 op on the right side of Eq. (23.21). 

ROW AND COLUMN MATRICES 

We have been dealing thus far with square matrices like H and Q, which 
represent dynamical variables and are often hermitian, and rectangular 
matrices like U, V, and W, which transform from one representation to 
another and are unitary. A particular state a of a system can be repre- 
sented by a function ^«(r), which may be thought of as a matrix with 
one column, in which the rows are labeled by the coordinate r; as remarked 
above, a need not label a complete set of functions but can be considered 
by itself. Since the w*(r) are a complete set, ty a can be expanded in terms 
of them: 

*«(r) = Skaatutir) (23.22) 

where the coefficients a„k are given by 

a«* = K(r)* a (r) d*r (23.23) 

These equations may be written in matrix form as 

4&gt;a = Wa a and a a = U+ a (23.24) 



162 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

respectively, where a a is a one-column matrix whose rows are labeled by 
k. Thus, just as U transforms an operator like H from the coordinate 
to the energy representation through Eq. (23.14), it also transforms a 
state function from the coordinate to the energy representation through 
the second of Eqs. (23.24). 

In similar fashion we can write 

^«(r) = SA M t&gt; M (r) and b ait = /&lt;(r)^«(r) d 3 r 

in matrix form as 

ta = V% a and b a = V$ a (23.25) 

Combination of Eqs. (23.22), (23.23), and (23.18) gives 

O a = Ufa = UV*b a = Wb a 

so that W transforms the state function from the ft representation b a to 
the energy representation a a , as expected. 

An important property of unitary transformations is that they 
leave the norm of a state function unchanged. In the coordinate repre- 
sentation, the norm is just the normalization integral, which may be 
written as 

JV»*„(r) d*r - S r ^(r)^(r) = +J+ m 

The right side is the matrix product of the one-row matrix ^J, which is 
the hermitian adjoint of &amp;, and has its columns labeled by the coordinate 
r, and the one-column matrix $ a . The result is a one-row, one-column 
matrix, which is simply a number. It is evident that the norm is real 
and nonnegative. With the help of Eq. (23.24), the norm may be 
written 

&amp;»tya = aJUWa a = aja a 

which is equal to S*|aofc| 2 . In similar fashion, &amp;,ty a = bjb a , so that all 
three representations of the state function have the same norm. A 
state function for which the norm exists (i.e., is not infinite) may be 
normalized by dividing it by (^ a tya)*, in which case its norm becomes 
equal to unity. 

It is interesting to note that the identity (23.21) becomes trivially 
valid when rewritten in terms of coordinate matrix representations of the 
state functions &amp;« and fo: 

Equation (22.16) shows that the two sides are the same. The structure 
of the matrix products is such that each side is a one-row, one-column 
matrix and hence a number. 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 163 

HUBERT SPACE 

A geometrical picture that is often used regards a state function such as 
&amp;», a„, or b a as a state vector in an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. 1 
Each dimension corresponds to one of the rows of the one-column matrix 
that describes the state, and the component of the state vector along that 
axis of the Hilbert space is numerically equal to the corresponding ele- 
ment of the matrix. Different choices for the orientation of the axes in 
the Hilbert space correspond to different choices for the representation. 
For example, the energy representation corresponds to choosing axes in 
such a way that a state vector oriented along one of these axes is an 
eigenstate of the hamiltonian. More generally, the vector a a has the 
component a ak along the axis that goes with the energy eigenvalue E k . 
The norm of a state function is just the square of the length of the 
corresponding state vector in Hilbert space, where "length" is suitably 
generalized to take account of components that may be complex numbers. 
The norm is a special case of the inner product of two state vectors &amp;, and 
fo, which is defined as 

(*«,**) = *.V, = JtfWMr) d*r (23.26) 

and is also a number. When a and are the same state, this is equal 
to the norm. When the inner product vanishes, the state vectors are 
said to be orthogonal. The inner products of these state vectors, expressed 
in the energy and the Q representations, are 

(a a ,ap) = ajap and (b a ,bp) = bjbp 

respectively. It is apparent from Eqs. (23.24) and (23.25) that the inner 
product is independent of the representation, just as is the norm. It 
follows that a unitary transformation from one representation to another 
corresponds to a rotation of axes in the Hilbert space, without change in 
the state vectors. A particular state vector has different components 
when referred to different axes, and these constitute the different repre- 
sentations of the state. 

It also follows that operation on ^ with £2 op performs a transforma- 
tion on the state vector ^ so that it becomes another state vector ity^. 
We refer to this transformation as a generalized rotation of the state vector 
in Hilbert space, the word "generalized" indicating that the rotation may 
involve stretching or contraction of the components as well as pure 
rotation; in particular, the generalized rotation usually does not conserve 
the norm of the state vector. The matrix element ^ity^ = (taSty?) is 

1 R. Courant and D. Hilbert, "Methods of Mathematical Physics," vol. I, p. 55 
(Interscience, New York, 1953); P. R. Halmos, "Introduction to Hilbert Space," 
chap. I (Chelsea, New York, 1957). 



164 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

then the inner product of the state vectors yp a and ity^. It is easily seen 
to be independent of the representation. 

DIRAC'S BRA AND KET NOTATION 

The transformation theory developed in this section can be put into 
extremely compact form by making use of a notation invented by Dirac. 1 
We describe a state function or state vector, whether it be represented 
by $ a , a a , or b a , by a ket or ket vector \a), and the hermitian adjoint 
state yf/J, aj, or bj by a bra or bra vector (a\. The inner product of two 
state vectors is written 

M» = &lt;a|j8&gt; 
and is called a bracket expression, which is a number. The first three 
and last three letters of bracket provide the names for the two kinds of 
state vectors. 

Operation on a ket vector from the left with £2 produces another 
ket vector 

fl|j8&gt; = |/3'&gt; (23.27) 

and operation on a bra vector from the right with £2 produces another 
bra vector 

&lt;a|Q = &lt;«"| 

The matrix element of Q between states a and $ is a number and can 
be written in any of the equal forms 

Q«* = J#(r)n*,(r) d 3 r = J[Qty a (r)]'V/Kr) d*r 

= &lt;«|/3'&gt; = &lt;a"|/8&gt; = (a\m (23.28) 

of which the first and last are the most commonly used notations. The 
matrix elements of the hermitian adjoint operator Q f are given in accord- 
ance with Eq. (22.15) by 

(0%, = 0^ = &lt;flOt|«&gt; = &lt;«|Q|0&gt;* 

A particular example of Eqs. (23.27) and (23.28) is that in which 12 is the 
unit operator: 

&lt;a|l|0&gt; = &lt;a|)S&gt; 

This equation can be used to obtain a bracket expression for the unitary 
matrix W from (23.5) by identifying ^„ with u k and ^ with i&gt;„: 

w kll = &lt;*| M &gt; = &lt;/#&gt;* (23.29) 

We are now in a position to rewrite the principal equations of this 

1 P. A. M. Dirac, "The Principles of Quantum Mechanics," 4th ed., sec. 6 (Oxford, 
New York, 1958). 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 165 

section in Dirac notation. Our three representations will be specified 
by the three complete sets of kets \k), \n), and |r&gt;. Just as \k) is an energy 
eigenstate with eigenvalue E k , and |/i&gt; is an fi eigenstate with eigenvalue 
to M , so |r) is a coordinate eigenstate with eigenvalue r (compare with Chap. 
3, Prob. 2). Then, in analogy with (23.28), Eq. (23.16) may be written 
in the forms 

&lt;fc|r&gt; = «?(r) and &lt;r|fc) = «*(r) (23.30) 

Similarly, we may write 

&lt;/i|r&gt; = v*(t) and &lt;r| M ) = »„(r) (23.31) 

Again, identifying i&gt; a with u k , we obtain 

* B (r) = &lt;r|a&gt; a ak = (k\a) &amp;„ M = fc|a&gt; (23.32) 

A summation convention will be employed such that any state 
symbol that appears twice in a given expression (once in the ket and once 
in the bra position) is assumed to be summed over a complete orthonormal 
set of states; thus the symbol S M will be omitted from expressions of the 
form 

S„ • • • ImXmI • • • (23.33) 

The rewritten equations below are numbered with primes of their original 
numbers. 



Q\fi) = w M |/i) or 


(r|n|r' 


)(r'|M&gt; - 


oj^rJM) 


(23.3') 


k&gt; = |*X*Im&gt; or 


&lt;rU&gt; 


= &lt;r|*X*|M&gt;- 


(23.4') 


&lt;*| M &gt; = &lt;&amp;|r)&lt;r|M&gt; 








(23.5') 


|*&gt; = |mXmI*&gt; or 


&lt;r|*&gt; 


- (*\Mk) 


(23.6') 


&lt;*|mXm|J&gt; = (K\r)(T\D = (k\l) 








(23.7') 


&lt;r| M )&lt;M|r'&gt; = &lt;r|r'&gt; 








(23.8') 


(»\k)(k\v) = &lt; M k) 








(23.9') 


(k\H\l) = E k (k\l) 








(23.10') 


(k\^\H\v)(v\l) = (k\H\l) 








(23.12') 


&lt;r|^|r'&gt;&lt;r'|/b&gt; = (T\l)(l\H\k) 








(23.15') 


&lt; M |rXr|tf|r'Xr» = b\H\,) 








(23.17') 


&lt;A|m&gt; = &lt;*|rXr| M &gt; 








(23.18') 


&lt;r|a&gt; = &lt;r|fcX*l«&gt; 








(23.22') 


&lt;fc|a&gt; = &lt;fc|r&gt;&lt;r|a&gt; 








(23.23') 


&lt;r|a&gt; = &lt;r|/«&gt;0*|a&gt; and 




(m|«&gt; - 


&lt;M|r&gt;&lt;r|a) 


(23.25') 


(a\0) = &lt;«|rXr|^&gt; 








(23.26') 



166 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

With the exception of Eqs. (23.3') and (23.10'), which are eigenvalue 
equations for fi and H, respectively, all these equations have one property 
in common. If we assume that a repeated state symbol (k, n, or r), 
which is understood to be summed over a complete orthonormal set of 
states as in (23.33), is equivalent to the unit operator, these equations 
become trivial identities. For example, each of the two sides of Eq. 
(23.15') becomes equal to &lt;r|ff|*), since |r')(r'| and \l)(l\ may be replaced 
by unit operators on the left and right sides, respectively. This replace- 
ment is evidently equivalent to the use of the closure property of any 
complete orthonormal set of functions. Conversely, unit operators can 
always be inserted, as in going from the left to the right side of (23.4'). 
The simplest proof of the correctness of these assumptions is the observa- 
tion that the removal or insertion of such repeated state symbols always 
leads to valid equations. 

Note that an insertion can also be made between two operators, 
for example, 

S2r = Q\k)(k\T (23.34) 

PROJECTION OPERATORS 

Consider the equation 

\a) = S M |M&gt;&lt;At|a&gt; = S*PJ«&gt; (23.35) 

where the operator P„ is denned by 

P» = ImXmI (23.36) 

for a single state /z, that is, without the generalized summation. It is 
clear from the first of Eqs. (23.3') that P„|a&gt; is an eigenstate of S2 with 
eigenvalue «v Thus an arbitrary ket \a) can be written as a generalized 
sum of eigenstates of any operator S2 through Eq. (23.35). The operator 
P„ is called a projection operator, since it projects out of \a) the part that 
is a particular eigenstate of 12. 

Suppose now that fi has only two distinct eigenvalues ui and co 2 , 
with a great deal of degeneracy. An example might be the parity oper- 
ator, with eigenvalues ± 1, or a component of the spin angular momentum 
of a spin £ particle, with eigenvalues ±%h (see the next chapter). In 
such a situation it is sometimes desirable to write any state \a) as a sum 
of two parts, each of which is an eigenstate of 12 with the eigenvalues 
«i and £02- This can be accomplished by denning projection operators 
through the equations 

Pi s S^- M ,P A (23.37) 

with i = 1, 2, instead of through (23.36). Then P t \a) is an eigenstate 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS "7 

of with eigenvalue to,-. It is easily verified that 



D $2 — 0)2 
"l — 

0)1 — 0)2 


and 


_ Q — oil 

C02 — 031 


(23,38) 


and that 








lPt-1 


Pfi = SijPi 




(23.39) 



Equations (23.38) can be generalized to the situation in which S2 
has more than two distinct eigenvalues. With the definition (23.37), we 
now have 

p. = [] Q ~ "' (23.40) 

11 o&gt;,- — «i 

and Eqs. (23.39) are still valid. 

Since Q is hermitian, its eigenvalues o&gt; M are real, and the P M and P t 
are evidently hermitian. Finally, it is easy to see that tr (P M ) = 1 if |m) 
is a normalized eigenstate that corresponds to a discrete eigenvalue. In 
this case tr (Pi) is equal to the number of linearly independent eigen- 
states of S2 that have eigenvalue o&gt;,; hence it is equal to the dimensionality 
of the Hilbert subspace that corresponds to a&gt;i. 

We shall have occasion to discuss projection operators further in 
Sec. 42. 

PHYSICAL MEANING OF MATRIX ELEMENTS 

We have seen that the diagonal matrix elements of an operator that is in 
diagonal form are just the eigenvalues of that operator. Comparison with 
the work of Sec. 7 shows that, if the operator is not in diagonal form, the 
diagonal matrix elements are the expectation values of operators for 
states that are normalized. More generally, (a|ft|a)/(a|a) is the expecta- 
tion value of the operator for the state represented by the normalizable 
ket |a). 

Thus far we have no simple interpretation for off-diagonal matrix 
elements such as &lt;o|Q|j8&gt;. We shall see in Chap. 8 that, among other 
things, they are related to the probabilities for transitions between pairs 
of states. 



24DEQUATIONS OF MOTION 

The transformation theory developed in the preceding section makes no 
reference to dynamics; it deals with the description of a physical system 
at one instant of time. This description involves three kinds of objects. 
First, there are those which specify the state of the system at a particular 
time. These may be written as state functions ^«(r) ; as column matrices 



168 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

^a, a a) or b a ; as Hilbert space vectors; or as kets \a). To each of these 
there corresponds a hermitian adj oint quantity such as \f/ a f or(a\. Second, 
there are unitary transformations, which may be written as rectangular 
matrices such as U, the elements of which are bracket expressions (k\r). 
These effect changes from one representation to another. From the 
Hilbert-space point of view, they rotate axes without changing the state 
vectors, so that a particular state vector is referred to a different set of 
axes. Third, there are dynamical variables, such as S2, which may be 
written as operators or as square matrices. The elements of these 
matrices can be calculated with respect to a particular set of axes in 
Hilbert space, and a unitary matrix transforms their values from one set 
of axes or representation to another. Thus U transforms 12 from the 
coordinate representation (r|G|r') to the energy representation (&amp;|£2|0, just 
as it transforms \a) from the coordinate representation &lt;r|a) to the energy 
representation (k\a). 

Alternatively, the matrix elements of Q can be calculated with 
respect to particular state vectors yp a , which need not be members 
of a complete set. These matrix elements are the inner products 
(ypafbl/p) = (a|J2|j8&gt; and are invariant with respect to unitary trans- 
formations; that is, their numerical values do not depend on the choice 
of the representation (choice of axes in Hilbert space). The result of 
operation with £2 on a ket ||8&gt; is a new ket Q|0), which is related to \fi) 
through a generalized rotation of the state vector in Hilbert space. If 
|/3) happens to be an eigenstate \n) of fi, then the "rotation" consists 
merely in multiplying the state vector by w M without changing its 
direction. 

A distinction must be made between rotations of axes in Hilbert 
space without change of the state vectors, which are produced by unitary 
transformations, and generalized rotations of state vectors without change 
of the axes, which are produced by dynamical variables. 

We consider in this section the way in which a physical system 
changes from one instant of time to another. As we shall see, this time 
dependence may be variously viewed as a change in the state vectors, in 
the dynamical variables, or in both. It turns out that there is one 
particular point of view that puts the equations of motion in a form very 
similar to that of the classical equations of motion in their hamiltonian 
formulation. This similarity suggests a rather general method for 
inferring quantum equations that agree in the appropriate limit with the 
classical equations for the same system. 

SCHRODINGER PICTURE 

We take as our starting point the time-dependent Schrodinger equation 
(6.16) and write it in terms of a time-dependent ket \a 8 {t)) and the 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 169 

hamiltonian H : 

ihj t \a s (t)) = H\a s (t)) (24.1) 

The total time derivative is used here since the dependence of the ket on 
coordinate or other variables does not appear explicitly. The subscript 
S refers to the ket as viewed in the Schrodinger picture, according to which 
it varies in time in conformity with the ordinary differential equation 
(24.1). The hermitian adjoint equation of motion is 

- ih j t (a s (t)\ = (a s (t)\W = (a s (t)\H (24.2) 

since H is hermitian. 

The solutions of the differential equations (24.1) and (24.2) are 
easily found if H is independent of the time, which we assume to be the 
case: 

M0&gt; = e-*" ft M0)&gt; (a s (t)\ = (a s (0)\e ist ' h (24.3) 

That the differential equations follow from Eqs. (24.3) may be verified 
by expanding the exponentials in power series and differentiating term 
by term. 

The operator e~ iHtlh is an infinite sum of powers of H , each of which 
is a dynamical variable that can be written as an operator or a square 
matrix. Thus the series as a whole is also a dynamical variable. In 
this particular case, it is easily seen to be unitary since H is hermitian. 
However, it is essential to remember that e~ imih is not a unitary trans- 
formation in the same sense as U, V, or W. It does not transform from 
one representation to another (rotation of axes in Hilbert space) ; rather 
it changes the ket |«s(0)) into the ket \as(t)) and so performs a generalized 
rotation of the state vector in Hilbert space. However, since e~ iBi,h is 
unitary, the norm of the ket is unchanged, and the generalized rotation 
in this case is a pure rotation. 

The time rate of change of the matrix element of a dynamical vari- 
able Qs in the Schrodinger picture is easily found with the help of Eqs. 
(24.1) and (24.2): 

j t &lt;as(t)\Q s \M)) = [jg&lt;«*(0l] S&gt;s I M0&gt; 

+ (a s (t) | ^f | S (*)) + (a s (t) | 0* [5 | S (*))] 

/**(*)) + ^ («s(t)\(QsH - m s )\0 s (t)) (24.4) 



(«*(*) 



dQ s 



dt 



The first term on the right side is that part of the change in the matrix 
element that arises from any explicit dependence that Qs may have on 



^UPSF.'^PMR'WT 



"0 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

the time, and the second term is that caused by the change in time of the 
state vectors. The operator that appears in this second term is called a 
commutator bracket, which is defined by 

[A,B] = AB - BA (24.5) 

Note that, in accordance with the definitions of Sec. 22, the commutator 
bracket has no meaning unless both matrices are square and have their 
rows and columns labeled in the same way. 

An interesting special case of Eq. (24.4) is that in which tt s commutes 
with H and has no explicit dependence on the time. Then the right side 
is zero, and all matrix elements of ft s are constant in time. Such a 
dynamical variable is said to be a constant of the motion. 

HEISENBERG PICTURE 

Substitution of Eqs. (24.3) into (24.4) gives 



j t (a s (0)\e^^Q s e- iH " h \M0)) = (a s (0) 



piHt/h " Ua p-iHtlh 
dt 



»(0) 



+ ^ (a s (0)\[e iBtlh n s e- iBt i\H]\fi s (0)) (24.6) 

where use has been made of the fact that H commutes with e ± imlh . It 
is convenient to define time-independent state vectors through 

M0&gt; ■ M0)&gt; = e iH « h \a s (t)) (24.7) 

and time-dependent dynamical variables through 

Qh = e iHtlh Q s e- iHtlh (24.8) 

Unless fi s commutes with H, Sl H depends on t even if Q s has no explicit 
time dependence. The subscript H denotes the Heisenberg picture. The 
time t = at which the kets and operators in the Schrodinger picture 
are the same as those in the Heisenberg picture is, of course, arbitrary 
and is chosen for convenience. If this time were t = t , then e ±imlh 
would be replaced by e±«'^«-«o)/*. 

Since |a#(0) does not depend on the time, the explicit mention of t 
may be omitted. Further, the time derivative on the left side of Eq. 
(24.6) can be taken inside the matrix element, so that the equation 
reads 

(an | g 0* | ft,) = («* | ^jf | Pa) + ^ &lt;a*|[a*,fl]|fcr&gt; (24.9) 

a accordance with (24.8) we ha 

I ~ \dtJ H 6 dt 6 



where in accordance with (24.8) we have defined 

an 

dt 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 171 

Since Eq. (24.9) is valid for an arbitrary bra and an arbitrary ket, it 
must be valid for the operators themselves. We are thus led to the 
equation of motion as viewed in the Heisenberg picture : 

TT = *w + k [Qh ' H] (24 - 10) 

This equation, which also follows directly from differentiation of Eq. 
(24.8), is the one that is most similar to the corresponding classical 
equation of motion, as we shall see below. It should be noted from Eq. 
(24.8) that H is the same in the Schrodinger and Heisenberg pictures. 

We thus see that the description of the change in time of a physical 
system may be viewed in two contrasting ways. In the Schrodinger 
picture, the dynamical variables are constant in time (except for a possible 
explicit time dependence) and the state vectors vary in accordance with 
Eq. (24.1). In the Heisenberg picture the state vectors are constant in 
time and the dynamical variables vary in accordance with Eq. (24.10). 
The transformation from one picture to the other is made with the help 
of the unitary dynamical variables e ±imlh in accordance with Eqs. (24.7) 
and (24.8). 

We have deliberately avoided referring to these "pictures" as 
"representations," as is sometimes done, since we wish to reserve the 
term "representation" for designation of the choice of axes in Hilbert 
space or, equivalently, the choice of the complete orthonormal set of 
functions, with respect to which the states and dynamical variables are 
specified. In this connection it is important to note that Eqs. (24.1), 
(24.7), (24.8), and (24.10) have the same form in all representations, as 
is easily shown. On the other hand, we use the term "transformation" 
in connection with the change from one picture to the other, since it is 
accomplished by means of a unitary operator. Because of this, all norms 
and inner products of state vectors are independent of the picture and 
constant in time, as well as independent of the representation. 

INTERACTION PICTURE 

The discussion of the two preceding subsections shows that neither the 
state vectors alone nor the dynamical variables alone are central for the 
description of the development of a physical system in time. Both can 
be altered by means of the unitary transformation e~ iHtlh , and the two 
pictures thus obtained are equally valid. The quantities that are not 
altered are the matrix elements of dynamical variables calculated for 
pairs of states, such as (a|Q|i8). These provide the essential physical 
content of the theory, since eigenvalues, expectation values, and transition 
probabilities can be obtained from them. It is apparent that any unitary 



172 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

transformation, whether or not it depends on the time, may be applied to 
both states and dynamical variables, without affecting the values of the 
matrix elements. Thus an arbitrarily large number of different pictures, 
as well as of different representations, can be found. 

An especially useful third picture can be specified by dividing the 
hamiltonian into two parts, 

H = H + H' (24.11) 

such that H does not depend explicitly on the time and also has a simple 
structure. For example, H might be the kinetic energy and H' the 
potential energy. Or H might be the hamiltonian for a relatively simple 
potential such as the coulomb field and W some additional interaction 
such as an external electromagnetic field. In the latter case it is often of 
interest to permit H' to depend explicitly on the time, and so we shall 
admit this possibility in what follows. Since H, H , and H' do not in 
general commute with each other, subscripts must be used to distinguish 
between them in the various pictures. 

We define the interaction picture by the equations 

\ai(t)) = e iH os^\ as (t)) 

(24.12) 
S2j(0 = e iH °* tlh Sl s e~ iH &lt;&gt;* tlh 

so that the interaction and Heisenberg pictures are the same when 
H' = 0. We know from earlier work that H H = H s , and the second of 
Eqs. (24.12) shows that H t = H os . In general, Hi ^ H s , H 0H ^ H s, 
and H' s , H' H , and H\ are all different. Differentiation of the first of Eqs. 
(24.12) gives for the equation of motion of \ai(t)) 

ihj t \ ai (t)) = -Hose^s^lasit)) + ihe iH ^ j { \a s (t)) 

= -Hoslcuit)) + e**«"*jy a e-«««/*M0&gt; 

= e iH *»!i*H' s e- iH ** tlh \ai(t)) 

= H'j\ ai (t)) (24.13) 

where use has been made of Eqs. (24.1), (24.11), and the second of Eqs. 
(24.12). In similar fashion, differentiation of the second of Eqs. (24.12) 
gives for the equation of motion of Sli(t) 

* = f + &gt;."«) = ^ + &gt;'M &lt;*•"&gt; 

What the interaction picture accomplishes is to assign part of the 
time dependence to the state vectors and part to the dynamical variables, 
instead of having one constant and the other with the time dependence 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 173 

caused by the full hamiltonian. In this picture the state vectors change 
in accordance with H ' and the dynamical variables in accordance with 
H ; note the resemblance between Eqs. (24.1) and (24.13) on the one 
hand, and between Eqs. (24.10) and (24.14) on the other. This is useful 
if H' is a small disturbance or perturbation, since then the dynamical 
variables have their unperturbed forms and the state functions are nearly 
constant in time (see Sec. 35). 

ENERGY REPRESENTATION 

The energy representation is specified by the kets \k), which are eigen- 
states of the full hamiltonian H with eigenvalues E k . Equation (24.1) 
then shows that in the Schrodinger picture the time-dependent ket 
\ks(t)) satisfies the equation 

ifij t \k 8 (t)) = H\k s (t)) = E k \k s (t)) 

which integrates to 

\ks(t)) = |/b s (0)&gt;e-^/A (24.15) 

This is in agreement with Eq. (8.3). Equation (24.15) and its adjoint 
can be used to find the time dependence of the matrix elements in the 
Schrodinger picture of an operator that has no explicit time dependence: 

(ks(t)\Q s \ls(t)) = (k s (0) \n s \ls(0) )e i ^-E l )m ( 24 .i 6 ) 

It is easily verified explicitly that this is equal to the matrix element 
(fcff|J2ff|Zjy) in the Heisenberg picture, as it must be. 

Equation (24.16) shows that off-diagonal matrix elements in the 
energy representation oscillate in time with frequencies that are propor- 
tional to the energy differences between the stationary states, in accord- 
ance with Bohr's frequency condition (see Sec. 2). This is consistent 
with the remark at the end of Sec. 23 that these matrix elements are 
related to the transition probabilities between states. It also follows 
from Eq. (24.16) that diagonal matrix elements or expectation values in 
the energy representation are constant in time for operators that have no 
explicit time dependence. 

CLASSICAL LAGRANGIAN AND HAMILTONIAN EQUATIONS OF MOTION 

In order to bring out the similarity between Eq. (24.10) and the corre- 
sponding classical equation, we review briefly the structure of classical 
hamiltonian theory. The equations of motion of a conservative dynam- 
ical system that has/ degrees of freedom may be derived from a lagrangian 
function L(g lf . . . , q f , q lt . . . , q f&gt; t) of the coordinates g„ the velocities 



174 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

g, = dqi/dt, and the time, by means of a variational principle: 1 

8 f t [ 2 Ldt = SqM = dqi(t 2 ) = (24.17) 

The resulting lagrangian equations are 

Tt(ir)-ir= i = i---f (24.18) 

at \oqiJ oqi 

If now we define a momentum canonically conjugate to g, as 
Pi = dL/dq~i, and a hamiltonian function of the coordinates and momenta 
as 

H(qi ■ • • q f , pi • • • p f , t) = 1 p4t ~ L (24.19) 

t = i 

variation of H leads to the hamiltonian equations of motion 

* = f *--'£ ••-!■■•/ (24.20) 

The time dependence of any function of the coordinates, momenta, and 
the time, calculated along a moving phase point, is 



vi rt dF _l V ( dF ■ i dF \ 

V (§E ?K _dH dF\ 

.L \dq { dpi dqi dpj 



dt ^ 

on making use of the hamiltonian equations (24.20). The Poisson 
bracket {A,B} of any two functions of the coordinates and momenta is 
defined as 

t = i x 

In terms of the Poisson bracket, the equation of motion for the function 
F of the dynamical variables becomes 

£-£+!'■*» (24 - 22) 

1 E. T. Whittaker, "Analytical Dynamics," 3d ed., sees. 99, 109 (Cambridge, London, 
1927); H. C. Corben and P. Stehle, "Classical Mechanics," sees. 26, 63 (Wiley, New 
York, 1950); H. Goldstein, "Classical Mechanics," chaps. 2, 7 (Addison- Wesley, 
Reading, Mass., 1950); A. Katz, "Classical Mechanics, Quantum Mechanics, Field 
Theory," chap. 1 (Academic, New York, 1965). 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 175 

The left side of Eq. (24.22) is the total time derivative of F along a 
moving phase point. The first term on the right side takes into account 
the explicit time dependence of F, and the last term is the change in F 
arising from the motion of the phase point at which F is evaluated. 

POISSON BRACKETS AND COMMUTATOR BRACKETS 

The strong resemblance between Eqs. (24.10) and (24.22) suggests that 
quantum analogs of the classical equations of motion can be found in 
general by substituting the commutator bracket divided by ih for the 
Poisson bracket, 

\A,B} -&gt; ±.[A,B] (24.23) 

and working with the Heisenberg picture. 

There are two observations that lend support to this suggestion. 
The first concerns the classical conditions for a contact transformation 
from one set of canonical variables g„ p» to another Q if P,-: 1 

[Qi,Pj] = *v {Q»Qi) = {P^Pj} = (24.24) 

where the Poisson brackets are calculated with respect to the original 
variables q h p t . We saw in Sec. 6 that a successful transition from 
classical to quantum theory could be made by substituting the differential 
operator —ih(d/dx) for p x , etc. The commutator of x and p x can then be 
found by letting it operate on an arbitrary function g(i) of the coordinates. 

(xp x - p x x)g(r) = -ihx^ + ih-^ (xg) = ihg(t) (24.25) 

Since ^(r) is arbitrary, this and the other commutators may be written 
as operator equations: 

zPz — PxX = — ih lx- — x\ = ih 

*.( d d \ A (24.26) 

xy — yx = p x p y — p y p x = etc. 

These are in agreement with the classical equations (24.24) when the 
substitution (24.23) is made. 

The second observation is that the algebraic properties of the com- 
mutator brackets are identical with those of the Poisson brackets. It is 

1 Whittaker, op. cit., pp. 300, 307; Corben and Stehle, op. tit., chaps. 11-13; Goldstein, 
op. cit., chap. 8; Katz, loc. cit. 



176 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

readily verified from the definition (24.21) that 

{A,B\ = -{B,A} {A,c} = where c is a number 

{(A, + A 2 ), B} = {A 1} B\ + {A„B} ?) 

{iM„B} = {Ai,B}A t -\-Ai{A s ,B) 
{A,{B,C}} + {£,{C,A}} + {C,{A,B\} = 

The order of possibly noncommuting factors has not been altered. 
Dirac 1 has shown that the form of the quantum analog of the Poisson 
bracket is determined by Eqs. (24.27) to be the right side of (24.23) ; the 
constant h is, of course, arbitrary so far as this discussion is concerned 
(see also Prob. 9). 

QUANTIZATION OF A CLASSICAL SYSTEM 

We now have available a plausible procedure for finding a quantum 
system that reduces to any specified classical system in the correspondence 
principle or classical limit. We simply write the classical hamiltonian 
equations in terms of Poisson brackets and replace the Poisson brackets 
with commutator brackets in accordance with (24.23). The classical 
equation of motion (24.22) then becomes the quantum equation (24.10), 
which states how the dynamical variables in the Heisenberg picture 
change with time. Similarly, the classical relations (24.24) become 2 

[qi,vA = Mi [QiS - &lt;&gt; fa»»] = ° &lt; 24 - 28) 

These quantum conditions are generalizations of Eqs. (24.26) and are 
easily seen to be valid in any of the pictures discussed earlier in this 
section. Thus the Heisenberg picture need be specified only for the 
equations of motion; we shall assume that this is the case throughout 
the remainder of this section, and the subscript H will be omitted. 

Two precautions are necessary in applying this quantization proce- 
dure. First, the coordinates and momenta must be expressed in cartesian 
coordinates. Second, ambiguities in the order of noncommuting factors 
are usually resolved by taking a symmetric average of the various possible 
orders. These precautions are illustrated in the following example. 

It is important to realize that there is no unique way of making the 
transition from classical to quantum mechanics. Terms can always be 
added to the quantum equations of motion that vanish in the classical 
or correspondence-principle limit. On the other hand, if the classical 
behavior of a system is known, certain restrictions are placed on its quan- 

1 Dirac, op. tit., sec. 21. 

* Note that the derivation of Eq. (12.7) then shows that for any pair of canonical 

variables Ag* • Apt &gt; -£h. 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 177 

turn equations. The present procedure generally yields the simplest 
quantum system that has the correct classical limit. This simplest 
system may omit interesting aspects of the true situation; thus the 
intrinsic spin and magnetic moment that some charged particles actually 
possess do not appear in the example treated below. 

MOTION OF A PARTICLE IN AN ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD 

As an example of the foregoing quantization procedure, we consider the 
problem of the motion of a charged mass point in a general external 
electromagnetic field. The classical hamiltonian, expressed in terms of 
the canonical variables r, p and the electromagnetic potentials A(r,£), 
*(r,*), is 1 

where e is the charge on the particle and c is the speed of light; the 
electric and magnetic field strengths are given in terms of the potentials 
by 

E= --— -V* H = VxA (24.30) 

c at 

The quantum conditions (24.28) in cartesian coordinates are 
[*&gt;PJ = [y,Vv\ = \z,Vz] = ih (24.31) 

with other pairs of coordinate and momentum components commuting. 
We now use Eq. (24.10), with the expression (24.29) for H and the 
relations (24.31), to calculate expressions for the particle velocity dt/dt 
and acceleration d 2 r/dt 2 , for comparison with the corresponding classical 
expressions. 

EVALUATION OF COMMUTATOR BRACKETS 

In order to facilitate evaluation of some of the commutator brackets that 
arise from substitution into (24.10), we derive a few elementary results. 
Any two functions of r commute with each other, since all components 
of r commute with each other. It follows from (24.31) that 

x 2 p x — PxX 2 = x(pxX + ih) — pxX 2 

= (pxX + ih)x + ihx — p x x 2 = 2ihx 

It is readily shown by induction that 

x n p s — PxX* = nihx n ~ l (24.32) 

1 J. H. Van Vleck, "The Theory of Electric and Magnetic Susceptibilities," pp. 7, 
20 (Oxford, New York, 1932). Gaussian units are used in the present book. 



178 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It follows from (24.32) that for any function /(r) that can be 
expressed as a power series in x, y, z, the relation 

L/(r),pJ = /(r)p. - p x /(r) = ih ± /(r) (24.33) 

is valid. 1 Equation (24.33) can also be established for more general 
functions than power series by making use of the representation of p x 
as —ih(d/dx), as in (24.25); if we operate with the left side of (24.33) 
on an arbitrary function g(x), we obtain 

[/(r),pj*&lt;r) = -tfl [/(r) ^ - ^/(r) j g(r) = &lt;?(r) [*^/(r)j 

which is equivalent to the operator equality (24.33) since g(r) is arbitrary. 
By repeated application of (24.33) it is easily shown that 

/(')P. 1 -P-WD-«(p.| + |p.)-2ft| P . + *-g 

(24.34) 

VELOCITY AND ACCELERATION OF A CHARGED PARTICLE 

The hamiltonian (24.29) may now be written, with the help of (24.33), 

= £--— A-p + ^V-A + ^A' + e* (24.35) 

2m mc 2mc 2mc 2 

The time derivative of a component of r is then easily shown from (24. 10) 
to be 

% = -{v*-- A x ) (24.36) 

at m\ c J 

in agreement with the classical relation between the velocity and momen- 
tum of a particle in the presence of an electromagnetic field. 

The calculation of a component of the acceleration of the particle 



d?x 
dt 2 



— A f ^Px _ e dA x \ 
m\dt c dt J 



4~ [p x ,H] --^-/- [A X ,H] 
vhm mc dt inmc 



1 This corresponds to the classical relation {f(r),p x \ = df(i)/dx [compare with Eq. 
(24.23)]. 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 179 

is straightforward but rather tedious. The result may be written 
dt 2 m\c dt + dz) + 2m 2 c [\ Pv c y )\dx dy ) 

THE LORENTZ FORCE 

Equation (24.37), with the similar y- and 2-component equations, can 
be written as a single vector equation for the "force" : 

d 2 r / IdA \ 

+ ^[K p -^ A ) x(vxA) - (vxA)x K p -^ A )] 

= eE+ -2K^ xH - Hx ^) (24 - 38) 

where use has been made of Eqs. (24.30) and (24.36). Equation (24.38) 
is in agreement with the corresponding classical expression 

cE + - c (v X H) 

where v = dt/dt is the velocity of the particle, if we take a symmetric 
average of the two terms vX H and — H X v. These are identical 
classically but differ in quantum mechanics since the v given by (24.36) 
does not commute with H; also, although their sum is hermitian, the 
separate terms are not. 

Equation (24.38) includes a generalization of Ehrenfest's theorem, 
which was discussed in Sec. 7. If we consider a diagonal element, the 
left side is the product of the mass and the second time derivative of the 
expectation value of the position vector of the particle, since the Heisen- 
berg-picture kets are independent of t. The right side is the expectation 
value of the Lorentz force acting on the charge of the particle. Thus 
(24.38) states that a wave packet moves like a classical particle if it is 
sufficiently well localized so that the electromagnetic fields change by a 
negligible amount over its dimensions. This result can also be obtained 
by the method of Sec. 7 when, in accordance with (24.1) and (24.35), 
the Schrodinger-picture wave equation is taken to be 

*2-(-£'*+£ A -'+£*-*+roA"+*)* 

(24.39) 



180 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

VIRIAL THEOREM 

A proof of the virial theorem in quantum mechanics can be given in 
analogy with the corresponding proof in classical mechanics. In the 
latter, the starting point is the time average of the time derivative of 
the quantity r • p, which is zero for a periodic system. The analogous 
quantity in quantum mechanics is the time derivative of the expectation 
value of r • p, or the diagonal matrix element of the commutator of 
r • p and H in the energy representation, which is also zero. 

&gt;-p&gt;=i&lt;[(r-p),ffI&gt; = 

[&lt;r • f ),H] = Uxp, + yp, + zp.), P *' + %| + "'' + V(z,yS&gt;] 

= 2ihT - ih{t • W) 
where T is the kinetic energy. We thus conclude that 

2&lt;T) = &lt;r • VV) (24.40) 

Note that it is immaterial whether we start with r • p or p • r, since the 
difference between them is a constant and hence commutes with H. 

If V is spherically symmetric and proportional to r n , and the 
expectation values exist, Eq. (24.40) shows that 2(T&gt; = n(V). The 
case n = — 1 is in agreement with the result of Prob. 13, Chap. 4, and 
the case n = 2 is in agreement with the results of Sec. 13. 

25 U MATRIX THEORY OF THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR 

The linear harmonic oscillator was discussed from the point of view of 
the Schrodinger equation in Sec. 13. This system can also be treated 
by manipulating the matrix equations directly. The hamiltonian is the 
one-dimensional form of Eq. (23.2), with V(x) = £Kx*: 

H = g- + $Kx* (25.1) 

where x and p are hermitian since they are physically measurable dynam- 
ical variables. The quantum condition is 

xp — px = ih (25.2) 

No further information is needed to obtain the energy eigenvalues and 
eigenf unctions. 1 

1 Dirac, op. tit., sec. 34. 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 1*1 

ENERGY REPRESENTATION 

We work at first in the energy representation, in which H is diagonal. 
Equation (25.1) may be written in Dirac notation as 

(k\H\l) = E k (k\l) = -L (k\p\j)(j\p\l) + $K(k\x\j)(j\x\l) (25.3) 

where the summation symbol Si has been omitted as in Eq. (23.33). 
Now 

O'blO = &lt;'|p f li&gt;* = &lt;W&gt;* 

since p is hermitian, and a similar expression holds for the matrix elements 
of x. Thus, for the diagonal elements of Eq. (25.3), the right side is a 
sum of squares of absolute values of matrix elements and hence is non- 
negative. An energy eigenvalue E k can be zero only if the matrix ele- 
ments (k\p\j) and (k\x\j) are zero for all j. However, this would be 
inconsistent with the fcth diagonal matrix element of Eq. (25.2). We 
conclude, then, that all the energy eigenvalues are positive. 

As a next step, we calculate the commutator bracket of x and of p 
with#: 

xH - Hx = -p pH - Hp = -ihKx (25.4) 

in 

Equations of this type are generally useful if the representation is chosen 
so that one of the factors in the commutator is diagonal, since then a 
difference between two eigenvalues appears when a matrix element is 
taken. Thus the first of Eqs. (25.4) becomes 

(k\x\j)(j\H\l) - (k\H\j)(j\x\l) = (E t - E k )(k\x\l) = ^(k\p\l) (25.5) 

In similar fashion, the second of Eqs. (25.4) becomes 

(Ei - E k )(k\p\l) = -ihK(k\x\l) (25.6) 

It follows, on elimination of (fc|a;|Z) from Eqs. (25.5) and (25.6), that 
either (k\x\l) = &lt;*|p|Z) = or 

Ei - E k = ±h f^V = ±Hco e (25.7) 

where, as in Sec. 13, u e is the angular frequency of the corresponding 
classical harmonic oscillator. If we were to rule out the first possibility, 
the energy eigenvalues would all differ from each other by integer multi- 
ples of ha&gt;c- It is then possible to show, as will be done below, that these 
eigenvalues are equal to (n + ^)hw c , where n is a positive integer or zero. 
If we try to exploit the first possibility in order to bring in states with 



"2 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

different energy eigenvalues, we see that the matrices that represent x 
and p are identically zero for the new states and so again are inconsistent 
with Eq. (25.2). Thus the only possible states are those whose energy 
eigenvalues differ by integer multiples of fiw c - 

RAISING AND LOWERING OPERATORS 

Equations (25.5) and (25.6) can also be combined in a different way by 
multiplying the first by — mco c and adding it to the second. The result 
is 

(Ei - E k - hu t )(k\(p - imw a x)\l) = 

Thus (k\(p — imu c x)\l) fails to vanish only when E k = E t — hw c . This 
means that the result of operating with p — imucX on the ket \l) is some 
multiple of the ket \k), which has an energy lower by hw c - In similar 
fashion, it is easily seen that the hermitian adjoint operator p + imoi c x 
raises the energy of any state by hco c - Repeated application of the energy- 
lowering operator to any ket will ultimately lead to a difficulty, since the 
energy must be positive, unless there is a lowest energy eigenstate |0) 
such that 

(p - imw c z)\0) = (25.8) 

The lowest energy eigenvalue can be found from Eq. (25.8) by oper- 
ating on it from the left with p + imco c x. The result is 

(p + imu) e x)(p — ima) c x)\0) = [p 2 + ra 2 w c 2 x 2 + irrua e (xp — px)]\Q) 
= (p 2 + mWz 2 - mhw,)\0) = 2m(H - $ha,)\0) = 

Thus |0) is an eigenstate of H with the eigenvalue \h&lt;i&gt; e . Application of 
the energy-raising operator p + ima&gt; c x to |0) gives a multiple of the ket 
|1) that has energy %ha) e . Further application generates an infinite 
sequence of eigenstates that are conveniently labeled \n), with energy 
eigenvalues 

E n = in + h)hu&gt;c n = 0, 1, 2, . . . (25.9) 

This is in agreement with Eq. (13.8). 

It is often convenient to put the energy-raising and -lowering oper- 
ators in dimensionless form by multiplying them with — i(2m^w c ) _i and 
i(2mh(j} e )~*, respectively. We call the raising and lowering operators 
obtained in this way a f and a, respectively. It is easily seen that 

t H _l 1 t H 1 
ad* = t h 7i aa = * o 

Thus a and a + satisfy the commutation relation 

aa* - a f a = 1 (25.10) 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 



183 



and H may be written in terms of them as 

H = (tfa + m&lt;»c (25.11) 

It follows from Eqs. (25.9) and (25.11) that the eigenvalues of a f a 
are the positive integers and zero; for this reason a f a is often called the 
number operator. This result is a direct consequence of the commutation 
relation (25.10) and requires no other information. The fact that the 
eigenvalues of a? a, when a is any operator that satisfies Eq. (25.10), are 
the positive integers and zero is useful in connection with the quantization 
of wave fields (see Chap. 14). The operators a f and a appear there ab 
initio, rather than as combinations of x and p, and have the physical 
significance of respectively increasing and decreasing the number of 
particles represented by the field. They are therefore called creation 
and destruction operators. In the same context, the number operator 
a f a specifies the number of particles present in an eigenstate of the field. 



MATRICES FOR a, x, AND p 

The only non vanishing matrix elements of a are (n — l|a|n), which we 
call X». Similarly, the only non vanishing matrix elements of a f are 
(nla^n — 1); because of Eq. (22.13), these are equal to X*. Then a 
diagonal matrix element of a f a is 

&lt;n|a + a|n) = (n|a + |n')(n'|a|n&gt; = |\ n | 2 

where a summation over the complete set n' is implied. Since this 
diagonal element is equal to n, X„ is equal to n* except for a possible 
multiplying phase factor of unit magnitude, which we can choose to be 
unity. Thus the matrices for a and a f are 



a = 



10 

2* 

3* 





^ = 





10 

2* 

3* 



(25.12) 

The product a* a can be formed from these matrices; it is diagonal with 
eigenvalues 0, 1, 2, . . . , as expected. 

The expressions for a and a f in terms of x and p are readily solved 
back to give 



* - &amp; «" + "&gt; 



— 2~ J (a f - a) 



(25.13) 



184 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Explicit matrices for x and p are easily found from Eqs. (25.12) and 
(25.13). Each has non vanishing elements that border the principal 
diagonal on both sides, and they are in agreement with Eqs. (13.18). 

COORDINATE REPRESENTATION 

The ket |0) can be found in the coordinate representation (x\0) by solving 
Eq. (25.8) in that representation. We have 

(x\(p — im,(a e x)\Q) = (x\(p — imu)ex)\x')(x'\0) = 
where 

(x\p\x') = —ih-y- 5(x — x') and &lt;x|a;|a;') = x 8(x — x') 

so that 

(—ih-j imu c x)(x\0) = 

This has the solution 

&lt;x|0) = iloere-./w* 1 (25.14) 

where A is an arbitrary constant. The normalization requirement 

(0\x)(x\0) = f"j(x\0)\&gt;dx = 1 

shows that A = (mcoc/irh)* = a* /tt } , in agreement with Eq. (13.19) when 
a is denned as in Eq. (13.3). 

As remarked above, repeated application of the energy-raising oper- 
ator p + imwcX to (x\0) generates all the (unnormalized) eigenstates (x\n). 
It is easily verified that for an arbitrary function g(x) 



(p + ima&gt; c x)g(x) = -ifi (-^ - ~ xj g(x] 



) 

= - ihe™** 1 '™ j- [e-"-«* , /»g(x)] (25.15) 



A second application of p + imw c x gives 

(p + imo&gt; c x) 2 g(x) = -ifle mu ^ l2h j- {e~ nM ^i 2h [{p'+ imo&gt; e x)g(x)]) 



which on substitution from Eq. (25.15) becomes 
dx 2 



(-ta)«e«-«* , /»* ^ [e-^Wgix)] 



MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS 185 

The induction to (p + imuicx) n g(x) is evident. Thus, when g(x) is chosen 
to have the form (25.14), we obtain 

&lt;x|n&gt; = Ane™-*' 2 * ^ e -^c^M (25.16) 

where A n is a normalization constant. Equation (25.16) is in agreement 
with Eqs. (13.12) and (13.13). 



PROBLEMS 

1. Assume that any hermitian matrix can be diagonalized by a unitary matrix. 
From this, show that the necessary and sufficient condition that two her- 
mitian matrices can be diagonalized by the same unitary transformation is that they 
commute. 

2. Show that a nonsingular matrix of finite rank must be square. Also show that in 
this case the equation AA~ l = 1 implies the equation A~ l A = 1. 

3. Show that det (e A ) = e tr &lt;^&gt;. State the conditions on A that must be assumed 
in your proof. 

4. Find two matrices A and B that satisfy the following equations: 

A* = O AA* + At A =1 B = At A 

where O is the null matrix and 1 is the unit matrix. Show that B l = B. Obtain 
explicit expressions for A and B in a representation in which B is diagonal, assuming 
that it is nondegenerate. Can A be diagonalized in any representation? 

5. Find three matrices A, B, and C that satisfy the following equations: 

A* = B* = C 2 = 1 AB + BA = BC + CB = CA + AC = O 

where 1 is the unit matrix and O is the null matrix. Obtain explicit expressions for 
all three matrices in a representation in which A is diagonal, assuming that it is non- 
degenerate. 

6. Find three matrices A, B, and C that satisfy the following equations: 

A* = £ 2 = (7 s = 1 BC - CB = iA 

where 1 is the unit matrix. Show that AB + BA = AC + CA = O, where O is 
the null matrix. Obtain explicit expressions for all three matrices in a representation 
in which A is diagonal, assuming that it is nondegenerate. 

7. If A and B are any two square matrices of the same rank and C = [B,A], show that 

e A+B = e A e B e \C 

provided that [C,A] = [C,B] = 0. 

8. If H = p 2 /2/x + V(x) for one-dimensional motion of a particle, and V(x) can be 
expressed as a power series in x, show by purely matrix methods that 

dx _ p dp _ _ dV 

dt ix dt dx 

where x and p are in the Heisenberg picture. 



186 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

9. A(x,p) and B(x,p) can be expressed as power series in x and p, and [x,p] = ih. 
Show by purely matrix methods that 

Um±-[A,B] = [A,B\ 

ft— &gt;0 *w 

where the right side is the Poisson bracket calculated as if x and p were classical 
variables. 

10. The hamiltonian H = p72 M + V(r) has a set of eigenkets \k) with eigenvalues 
E k . Show that, if |Z&gt; is any ket that has a discrete eigenvalue, 

S k (E k - E t )\(k\x\l)\* - A* 

where a; is a cartesian component of r. As a byproduct of your solution, give a matrix 
proof of Prob. 9, Chap. 3. 

11. The hamiltonian for the harmonic oscillator may be written in the coordinate 
representation as 

&lt;s|J5T|*'&gt; = - ^ £- t S(x - x') + IKx* S(x - x') 

Transform H into the momentum representation, and find the p-representation wave 
functions that correspond to the x-representation wave functions given in Eq. (13.13) 
or (25.16). 

12. Show that the matrix for x obtained from Eqs. (25.12) and (25.13) is in agreement 
with Eqs. (13.18), and that Eq. (25.16) is in agreement with Eqs. (13.12) and (13.13). 



7 
Symmetry in 
Quantum Mechanics 



Symmetry is a fundamental attribute of the natural world that enables 
an investigator to study particular aspects of physical systems by them- 
selves. For example, the assumption that space is homogeneous, or 
possesses translational symmetry, leads to the conclusion that the linear 
momentum of a closed isolated system does not change as the system 
moves. This makes it possible to study separately the motion of the 
center of mass and the internal motion of the system. In similar fashion, 
the assumption that space is isotropic, or possesses rotational symmetry, 
means that the total angular momentum of such a system is constant. 
Connections of this kind between symmetry properties and conservation 
laws have been used earlier in this book without developing an elaborate 
formalism, as in the reduction of the Schrodinger equation for the hydro- 
gen atom from seven independent variables to one (Sec. 16). However, 
a systematic treatment is useful in solving more complicated problems. 
More important, the unified view of symmetry that results provides a 
deeper insight into the structure of physics. 

In this chapter we consider first the geometrical symmetries that may 
be associated with the displacements of a physical system in space and 

1»7 



1M QUANTUM MECHANICS 

time, with its rotation and inversion in space, and with the reversal of 
the sense of progression of time. We then discuss the dynamical sym- 
metries that lead to the unexpected degeneracies of the energy levels of 
the hydrogen atom and the isotropic harmonic oscillator. Several other 
symmetries that are of interest in physics are omitted, notably those that 
relate to molecules, crystals, and relativity. Although we shall consider 
mainly a single particle, or equivalently a pair of particles in the center- 
of-mass system, many of the results obtained can be extended to several 
interacting particles provided that the symmetries apply to all coordinates 
of all particles. For identical particles there is also an additional permu- 
tation symmetry, which will be discussed in Sec. 40. 



26DSPACE AND TIME DISPLACEMENTS 

We shall work entirely in the Schrodinger picture. As our first symmetry 
operation, we consider the displacement in space of a physical system in 
a state represented by the ket \a) or the wave function \p a (r). The dis- 
placement is through a vector p and changes the ket \a) into the ket \a) 
or changes the wave function ^«(r) into the wave function ^v(r)- This 
means that 

tfv(r + 9) = *«(r) (26.1) 

As an example of (26.1), we note that, if ^«(r) is a wave packet that has 
its maximum value when its argument r is equal to r , then yf/a'if) is a 
wave packet of the same shape that has its maximum value when its 
argument r is equal to r + p. Thus if/ a &gt; has its maximum displaced by 
p with respect to the maximum of \f/ a . 

What we have just described is usually called the active point of 
view, in which the coordinate system is unchanged and the state function 
is displaced. The completely equivalent passive point of view consists 
in leaving the state function unchanged but referring it to a coordinate 
system that is displaced by the vector — p with respect to the original 
coordinate system. For the situations discussed in this book, the active 
point of view seems to be more appropriate physically, and we shall use 
it consistently. However, it should be noted that most treatments of 
homogeneous Lorentz transformations make use of the passive point of 
view, which seems more suitable when relative motion (rather than rela- 
tive displacement) is being considered; the same physical system is then 
viewed by observers who are moving with respect to each other. 

UNITARY DISPLACEMENT OPERATOR 

Two kinds of transformations were discussed in Sees. 23 and 24. The 
first kind, of which U, V, and W are examples, are unitary transformations 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 189 

from one representation to another that rotate axes in Hilbert space with- 
out change in the state vectors. The second kind, of which Q and e~ iHtlh 
are examples, are dynamical variables that produce generalized rotations 
of the state vectors in Hilbert space without change in the axes. We now 
wish to find a transformation of the second kind that changes the ket 
\a) into the ket \a); since the norm of the ket should not be affected by 
displacement, the corresponding operator is expected to be unitary, and 
this will be shown by explicit construction. We call this operator t/ r (p), 
where the subscript denotes a displacement in space and the argument 
is the vector displacement interval [in contrast with £/ t (r) considered 
below, which is the operator for displacement in time through the 
interval t]. 

We thus have 

U r (»)\a) = \a') or I7,(p)*.(r) = ^(r) (26.2) 

The second of Eqs. (26.2) makes use of the coordinate representation 
of the state vector; together with Eq. (26.1) it becomes 

U r (Q)ta(T) = * (r - p) (26.3) 

In evaluating ^ a (r — p) it is convenient to choose the coordinate axes 
at first so that the x axis is in the direction of the vector p. Then a 
Taylor's series expansion gives 

^«(r - p) = ta(x - p, y, z) = f a (x,y,z) - P faf«(x,y,z) 



+ 2i dx~* +"( x &gt;y&gt; z ) - 



The right side may be written in the form 

e-" (aiax) ^ a (x,y,z) 



For a general choice of coordinate axes, p(d/dx) may be replaced by p • V, 
so that we obtain 

^«(r - p) = exp (-p • v)^a(r) = exp ( *j[ P ) ^«(r) 



where the momentum operator p = — ihV has been introduced. Thus 
if we choose 

U r ( 9 ) = exp ^p? (26.4) 

Eq. (26.3) is valid for all state vectors. Further, since the operator V, 
which is defined only in the coordinate representation, has been replaced 
by ip/h, Eq. (26.4) is valid in all representations. It is easily verified 
that U t (q) is unitary, since p is real and p is hermitian. 



1M QUANTUM MECHANICS 

EQUATION OF MOTION 

A physical system in a state represented by any ket \a(t)) at a particular 
time t can always be displaced in space through the vector 9 by making 
use of Eqs. (26.2) and (26.4). 1 However it need not be true that the 
kets \a'(t)) obtained in this way at different times will represent a 
possible motion of the system. In other words, if \a(t)) obeys the 
Schrodinger equation of motion (24.1), it may or may not be true that 
\a'(t)) = U r ( 9 )\a(t)) also obeys this equation. In order to see whether 
or not this is the case, we calculate the time derivative of \a'(t)): 

*^|a'«)&gt; - ihU r ( 9 ) 1 1«(0&gt; = U r ( 9 )H\a(t)) 

= U r ( 9 )HUS{ 9 )\«'(t)) 

This agrees with Eq. (24.1) if and only if 

U r ( 9 )HUS( 9 ) = H or [U r ( 9 ),H] = (26.5) 

If p is allowed to be any vector, Eq. (26.5) is valid only if p commutes 
with H. Then, in accordance with the discussion of Eq. (24.4), the 
momentum operator is a constant of the motion. It also follows from 
Sec. 22 that p and H can be diagonalized simultaneously, so that a 
single state can have well-defined eigenvalues for both momentum and 
energy. 

Thus we have shown that a physical system that can be displaced 
in space and still be a possible physical system can be characterized by 
a constant and well-defined value of the momentum, as well as of the 
energy. Such a system is said to possess space-displacement symmetry 
or space-displacement invariance. This result is reasonable, since a 
particle can be space-displacement symmetric or invariant only if no 
force acts on it, in which case its momentum is constant. A free electron 
possesses this symmetry, whereas the electron in a hydrogen atom does 
not. In the latter case, displacement of the wave function yields a wave 
packet that retains its form only momentarily. 

SYMMETRY AND DEGENERACY 

An important aspect of symmetry has to do with its relation to the 
degeneracy of energy eigenvalues. Suppose that a ket \a) represents an 
energy eigenstate of a system, so that H\a) = E a \a), and that there is 
some operator J2 that commutes with H. Then it is easily seen that 
ii|a) is also an eigenstate of H with the same energy eigenvalue E a . Thus, 
if ft|a) is linearly independent of \a), this energy eigenvalue is degenerate. 

1 The subscript S that denotes the Schrodinger picture is omitted here, since only 
this picture will be used throughout this chapter. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 191 

Since a space-displaced state is generally linearly independent of the 
original state, space-displacement symmetry (for which ft = p) gives 
rise to energy degeneracy of momentum eigenfunctions. This is not a 
new result, since we know that the energy of a free particle depends only 
on the magnitude, not the direction, of its momentum. An exceptional 
situation arises when the state is constant in space, since then the space- 
displaced state is not linearly independent. Such a state has zero momen- 
tum and is nondegenerate. 

Energy degeneracy associated with a geometrical symmetry such as 
space displacement is usually easy to identify. In Sec. 30 we shall con- 
sider two less obvious examples, of dynamical rather than geometrical 
symmetry, where there is also degeneracy. The problem then is to find 
the operator ft, analogous to p above, that commutes with the hamiltonian 
and hence defines the symmetry. 

MATRIX ELEMENTS FOR DISPLACED STATES 

A matrix element of a dynamical variable ft can be calculated for any 
pair of states and compared with the matrix element of the same operator 
when the states are displaced. The first matrix element is (a|ft|j8), and 
the second is 

(a'|ft| i 8') = (a|C/ r t(e)ftt/ r ( e )|/3&gt; 

It is apparent that matrix elements of any function of the momentum 
operator are unchanged when the states are displaced. On the other 
hand, if ft is the coordinate operator r, it can be shown that 

US( 9 )rU r ( 9 ) = r + g (26.6) 

Thus the matrix elements of r for the displaced states are equal to 
the corresponding matrix elements of r + g for the original states, as 
expected. 

THE GROUP CONCEPT 

The branch of mathematics that is appropriate for a full treatment of 
symmetry is the theory of groups. Although we shall make essentially 
no use of the formal aspects of group theory in this book, it is often 
convenient to refer to some of its ideas and terminology. We therefore 
give a few basic definitions here. 1 

1 For fuller discussions of symmetry and group theory, see E. P. Wigner, "Group 
Theory" (Academic, New York, 1959), especially chaps. 15, 20, and 26; M. Hamer- 
mesh, "Group Theory and Its Applications to Physical Problems" (Addison- Wesley, 
Reading, Mass., 1962), especially chap. 8; A. Messiah, "Quantum Mechanics," 
vol. II, chap. XV and App. D (North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 



192 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

A set of objects a,b,c, . . . form a group if a process can be denned 
that enables us to combine any two of the objects, such as a and b, to 
form an object ab, and if the following conditions are satisfied. 

1. All results of combination, such as ab, are members of the group. 

2. The group contains an identity or unit member e that has the proper- 
ties ae = ea = a, where a is any member of the group. 

3. Each member a has an inverse a -1 , also in the group, such that 
ar l a = aa~ 1 = e. 

4. Group combination is associative, so that (ab)c = a(bc). 

The members of the group are called elements, and the combination 
process is often called multiplication, even though it may not be related 
to arithmetic or matrix multiplication. For example, the integers 0, 
±1, ±2, . . . form a group if the combination process is ordinary 
arithmetic addition; in this case the identity or unit element e is the 
number 0. 

A group is abelian if multiplication is commutative, so that ab = ba 
for all pairs of elements. A group is continuous if its elements can be 
labeled by one or more continuously varying parameters. It is contin- 
uously connected if a continuous variation of the group parameters leads 
from any element to any other. A continuous group is compact if every 
infinite sequence of elements of the group has a limit element that is also 
in the group. Two groups are said to be isomorphic to each other if 
there is a unique one-to-one correspondence between elements of the two 
groups such that products of corresponding elements correspond to each 
other. If a group is isomorphic to another group, the elements of which 
are matrices, the latter is said to be a matrix representation of the former. 

It is easily established that all displacement vectors p form an 
abelian, continuously connected, three-parameter, noncompact group, for 
which the multiplication process is vector addition. Also, the operators 
U r (g) form a group that is isomorphic to the group of displacement 
vectors. In this case the multiplication process is successive operation 
and in the case of a matrix representation of the operators is matrix 
multiplication. 

1962); M. Tinkham, "Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics" (McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1964), especially chap. 5; M. L. Goldberger and K. M. Watson, "Collision 
Theory," chap. 2 (Wiley, New York, 1964); P. Roman, "Advanced Quantum Theory," 
chap. 5 and App. 2 (Addison- Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1965); H. J. Lipkin, "Lie 
Groups for Pedestrians" (North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1965); 
R. Hermann, "Lie Groups for Physicists" (Benjamin, New York, 1966); A. Katz, 
"Classical Mechanics, Quantum Mechanics, Field Theory," chap. 2 (Academic, 
New York, 1965). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 1M 

TIME DISPLACEMENT 

We consider next the displacement of a state represented by the ket \a(t)) 
in time through the interval t, which changes it into the ket \a'(t)). In 
analogy with Eq. (26.1), this means that 

\a'(t + r)&gt; = \a(t)) (26.7) 

As in the first of Eqs. (26.2), we define an operator C/t(r) that produces 
a generalized rotation of the ket \a(t)) into the ket \a(t)) : 

U t (r)\a(t)) = |«'(fl&gt; (26.8) 

Combination of Eqs. (26.7) and (26.8) gives 

U t (r)\a(t)) = \a(t - r)&gt; (26.9) 

The right side of Eq. (26.9) can be reduced, in analogy with Eq. (26.3), 
to give 

\a(t - t)) = er*'"\a(t)) (26.10) 

Since our kets are being viewed in the Schrodinger picture, Eq. 
(24.1) enables us to replace (d/dt)\a(t)) by (#&amp;) -1 iy|a(£))- However, 
(dV&lt;ft 2 )l&lt;*(0&gt; can be replaced by (ih)- 2 H 2 \a(t)) only if H is independent 
of the time, and a similar remark applies to the higher time derivatives 
that appear in Eq. (26.10). As in Sec. 24, we assume that H is constant 
and obtain 

U t (r) = e*"" 1 (26.11) 

Equation (26.11) is a valid expression for the time-displacement operator 
if it is applied to any ket that represents a physical state, that is, any ket 
that satisfies the Schrodinger equation (24.1). Since Ut(r) commutes 
with H, it is easily seen that the time-displaced ket \a'(t)) given by 
Eq. (26.8) also obeys the Schrodinger equation. Thus the assumption 
that the hamiltonian or energy operator is a constant leads to the con- 
clusion that a physical system can be displaced in time and still be a 
physical system. Such a system is said to possess time-displacement 
symmetry or invariance. 

Although intuitively obvious, it is slightly more difficult to show 
that if H depends on the time the system does not possess time-displace- 
ment symmetry. In this case the expression for £/«(r) is somewhat more 
complicated than Eq. (26.11). However, it is enough to consider the 
case in which t is infinitesimally small and only terms of first order in t 
are retained. Then U t (r) is given approximately by 1 + irH(t)/h and 
evidently depends on t as well as on t. Then, in order to see whether or 
not \a(t)) satisfies the Schrodinger equation, we calculate its time 



1,4 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

derivative from Eq. (26.8) : 

* J t W(t)) « - r ^ |«(0&gt; + U t {r)H(t)\a(t)) 
To first order in r, the right side is equal to 

riff 

-r^W(t)) + H(t)\a'(t)) 

so that \a'(t)) does not obey the Schrodinger equation. In other words, 
if the hamiltonian changes with time, the time- displaced system finds 
itself in an altered environment and hence will not develop properly in 
time. 

In the case in which H is constant, it might at first be thought that 
there is a contradiction between the first of Eqs. (24.3), 

|a(0&gt; = e^*"*|a(0)&gt; 

and Eq. (26.8), which with the help of (26.11) reads 

\ a '(t)) = eW\a(t)) 

That they actually agree may be seen by setting t = — r in the first 
equation and t = in the second, in which case they become 

|a(-r)&gt; = efr*/*|a(0)) and |a'(0)&gt; = e iT *'*|a(0)) 

respectively. Equation (26.7) with t = — r then shows that the left 
sides are equal. This may be put into words by saying that \a'(t)) has 
the structure at t = r that \a(t)) has at t = and hence may be obtained 
from \&lt;x(t)) by letting it develop backward in time from r to in accord- 
ance with Eq. (24.3). 

27DROTATION, ANGULAR MOMENTUM, AND UNITARY GROUPS 

As our next symmetry operation we consider the rotation in space of a 
physical system in a state represented by the ket \a) or the wave function 
t^ a (r). We describe a rotation by a linear operator R, which is so defined 
that any vector r is rotated into the vector Rr. The rotation changes 
the ket \a) into the ket \a) or changes the wave function yf/ a (t) into the 
wave function \f/ a &gt;(r). In analogy with Eq. (26.1), this means that 

tfv(Br) = *.(r) (27.1) 

PROPER ROTATION GROUP 

Each rotation operator may conveniently be represented by a 3 X 3 
matrix. We write the rectangular components of an arbitrary vector r 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 



195 



Xr 




til XX 


tixy 


Rxz 


X 


Vr 


= 


ttyx 


Ryy 


ttyz 


V 


z r. 




Rzx 


IX zy 


Rzz_ 


_z 



and the rotated vector i R as column matrices, so that the equation 
Tr = Rt is written as the matrix equation 



(27.2) 



The requirement that the components of t R be real when the components of 
r are real means that the elements of the matrix R are real. Further, 
the requirement that the scalar product of any two vectors be unchanged 
when both vectors are subjected to the same rotation can be used to show 
that R is orthonormal: the three rows of R are orthonormal to each 
other, the three columns of R are orthonormal to each other; also, the 
determinant of R is equal to ± 1. We shall consider in this section only 
proper rotations, for which the determinant is equal to +1. Since the 
determinant is not zero, the inverse transformation R~ 1 exists and has 
the property r = i2 _1 r«. It can also be shown that R~ l is the transpose 
of R : (R~ l )a = Rn, where i, j = x, y, z. Finally, since there are six inde- 
pendent constraints on the nine matrix elements Rij, all rotations can be 
described by three continuously varying parameters. 

The matrices R satisfy all the requirements of a group. The com- 
bination process is matrix multiplication, which is associative. Multi- 
plication of two matrices with the above properties leads to a third with 
the same properties. The matrix 6^ is the identity element, and each R 
has an inverse. An example is easily devised which shows that rotations 
do not in general commute, so that the group is not abelian. Thus the 
matrices R form a continuously connected, three-parameter group that 
is easily seen to be compact. This group is designated 0(3), the ortho- 
gonal group in three dimensions, which is the set of all 3 X 3 real 
orthonormal matrices with determinant equal to +1. 

A continuously connected group in which the parameters of the 
product of two elements are continuous, differentiable functions of the 
parameters of the elements is called a Lie group. The space- and time- 
displacement groups are noncompact Lie groups, and the rotation group 
is a compact Lie group. The Lorentz group has three parameters to 
describe rotations and three more parameters to describe velocity changes. 
It is a six-parameter Lie group that is, however, noncompact, since there 
is no transformation that corresponds to the limiting value c of the veloc- 
ity change in any direction. 

GEOMETRICAL ISOMORPHISM 

Each matrix R corresponds to a physical rotation. Hence it can be 
represented by a vector &lt;{&gt; whose direction is the axis about which rotation 
occurs (always assumed to be in the clockwise direction when looking 



196 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

out from the origin along &lt;[&gt;), and whose magnitude is the angle of rotation 
in radians. The endpoints of the vectors that represent all possible 
rotations fill a sphere of radius w, diametrically opposite points on the 
surface of this sphere represent the same rotation. The process by which 
two vector endpoints within the sphere are combined to form a third 
point in the sphere is complicated when described in terms of the coordi- 
nates of the first two points but can be determined by putting the three 
points into one-to-one correspondence with two of the R's and their 
matrix product. Thus such points in a sphere of radius t form a group 
that is isomorphic to the rotation group. 1 It is, however, more of pictorial 
than of calculational value, since the weight function for the group space 
is not constant. 

This geometrical isomorphism can be used to show that the rotation 
group, although continuously connected, is not simply connected. This 
means that the group parameters may be varied along more than one 
continuous path leading from any element to any other, so that these 
paths are not continuously deformable into each other. In the present 
case there are two distinct paths. One of them goes from element Ri to 
element R 2 entirely within the sphere. The other goes from Ri to the 
surface of the sphere, reappears at the diametrically opposite point, and 
then goes to R 2 . A path that makes two jumps between diametrically 
opposite surface points can be reduced to the first kind of path, and so 
on. Thus the rotation group is doubly connected. 

INFINITESIMAL ROTATIONS 

A great deal can be learned about the structure of a Lie group from a 
study of the elements that are infinitesimally close to the identity ele- 
ment. As might be expected, this is much simpler than a study of the 
full group. If the vector &lt;j&gt; is of infinitesimal length and only quantities 
of first order in &lt;j&gt; are retained, the relation Tr = Rt may be written 

r* ~ r + 4&gt; X r (27.3) 

Combination of Eqs. (27.2) and (27.3) shows that 



R « 



1 — 0s 0j, 

&lt;t&gt;z 1 — ■ 4&gt;x 

— &lt;t&gt;y 4&gt;x 1 



(27.4) 



We now wish to find a transformation Ur{§) that changes the ket 
| a) into the ket \a) or changes the wave function &amp;«(r) into the wave 
function ^(r): 

U*(+)*.(r) = Mr) (27.5) 

1 Wigner, op. cit., pp. 90, 249. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS »7 

Combination of Eqs. (27.1) and (27.5) gives 

£/*(&lt;l&gt;)lMr) = *«(«"*) 

« ^«(r - &lt;j&gt; X r) 

« *«(*) - «. X r) • V* a (r) 

= fc,(r) - ^ ($ X r) • p* a (r) 

in analogy with the derivation of Eq. (26.4). We may thus put 

Ua(+) « 1-j^-L (27.6) 

where in accordance with Eqs. (14.19) 

L = r X p (27.7) 

is the operator for the angular momentum of the particle about the 
origin. 

The three operators L x , L y , and L z are called the generators of the 
infinitesimal rotations about the three coordinate axes through the angles 
&lt;f&gt; x , 4&gt; v , and &lt;f&gt; z , respectively, in accordance with Eq. (27.6). In similar 
fashion, the infinitesimal forms of Eqs. (26.4) and (26.11) show that p 
and —H are the generators of the infinitesimal displacements in space 
and time, respectively. The fact that the components of p commute 
with each other leads directly to the conclusion that the space-displace- 
ment group is abelian. On the other hand, the components of L do not 
commute with each other and so the rotation group is not abelian. 

The equation of motion of the rotated ket \a) can be found in exact 
analogy with the discussion preceding Eq. (26.5). The condition that 
the system possess rotational symmetry or invariance is that U R ($) 
commute with H for all &lt;j&gt; or that the generators L x , L y , and L z commute 
with H . This last means that the angular momentum L is a constant 
of the motion, as is expected for a system that possesses rotational sym- 
metry. It also means that there is energy degeneracy if L|a) is linearly 
independent of \a). 

SPIN OF A VECTOR PARTICLE 

The fact that the generators of infinitesimal symmetry transformations 
are equal to recognizable dynamical variables in the simple situations 
thus far considered suggests that they be used to define dynamical vari- 
ables in more complicated situations. As an example, we now consider 
a particle possessing internal degrees of freedom that can be related to 
an intrinsic spin angular momentum. The particle is assumed to be 
described by a vector wave function t|r (r) instead of by a scalar wave 
function ^«(r) such as has been considered thus far. Further, we assume 



198 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



that, when the state is rotated, not only does r change into Rt but also 
ifc« changes into R^ a . Thus Eq. (27.1) becomes 

^•(Rt) = -Rtk(r) (27.8) 

In similar fashion Eq. (27.5) becomes 

tf*(*M«(r) = 4«'(r) (27.9) 

where U R ($) is now a tensor operator since it changes the vectorial 
character of ijr a . Combination of Eqs. (27.8) and (27.9) gives to first 
order in &lt;}&gt; 

« %a(R- l T) + &lt;J&gt; X $a(R- l T) 

« &lt;r a (r - &lt;&gt; x r) + &lt;j&gt; x i&amp; a (r) 



« it«(r) - | (4&gt; • L)&lt;r a (r) + &lt;&gt; x it-(r) 



(27.10) 



The tensorial character of U R ($) is most conveniently exhibited by 
writing it as a 3 X 3 matrix that multiplies the vector ifc a to produce the 
vector V, in analogy with Eq. (27.2). The first two terms on the right 
side of Eq. (27. 10) are then proportional to the unit matrix. Comparison 
of Eqs. (27.3) and (27.4) shows that the third term may be written in 
the form 

&lt;&gt; X tfc«(r) = - | (4» ' S)ifc„(r) 
where the components of S are the following 3X3 matrices : 



S x = ih 



S. = ih 




-1 







Sv 



ih 







-1 



(27.11) 



With this definition of S the infinitesimal rotation transformation is 



Ua(*) « 1 -;U.(L + S) 



* 



(27.12) 



The generators of the infinitesimal rotations are the three com- 
ponents of the vector 

J = L 4- S (27.13) 

which we identify with the total angular momentum of the particle. The 
orbital angular momentum operator is L, and it acts only on the r depend- 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 1» 

ence of ifc a (r) without affecting its components. The operator S is called 
the spin angular momentum, and it rearranges the components of t{r a (r) 
without affecting its r dependence. Thus L and S commute with each 
other. It often happens that L and S do not separately commute with 
H, whereas J does. Physically this means that the hamiltonian contains 
terms that couple spin and orbital angular momentum to each other but 
not to the surroundings. 

It was found in Eq. (14.22) that the possible eigenvalues of 
L 2 = L 2 + L y 2 + L 2 2 are 1(1 + l)h 2 , where I is a positive integer or zero 
and is called the orbital angular momentum quantum number. Direct sub- 
stitution from the matrices (27.11) shows that S 2 = S x 2 + S y 2 + S z 2 is 
equal to 2ft 2 times the unit matrix. This corresponds to I = 1 in the 
orbital case, so that the particle carries spin angular momentum h. This 
conclusion derives from the assumed vectorial transformation property 
of the infinitesimal elements of a Lie group determine the main character- 
istics of the structure of the entire group, since in effect they specify how 
the group elements may be integrated to a finite distance from the identity 
element. 1 

COMMUTATION RELATIONS FOR THE GENERATORS 

It was remarked above that the components of L do not commute with 
each other, and so the rotation group is not abelian. More generally, 
it can be shown that the commutation relations between the generators 
of the infinitesimal elements of a Lie group determine the main character- 
istics of the structure of the entire group, since in effect they specify how 
the group elements may be integrated to a finite distance from the identity 
element. 1 

The commutation relations between the components of L are readily 
found from Eq. (27.7) and the quantum conditions (24.26). The results 
are 

[L x ,L y ] = ihL z [L y ,L z ] = ihL x [L„L X ] = ihL y (27. 14) 

Direct substitution from Eqs. (27.11) shows that the components of S 
satisfy the same relations. Then, since L and S commute with each 
other, the components of J also satisfy Eqs. (27.14). These three equa- 
tions are often written in the equivalent form 

JXj = ihJ (27.15) 

The relations (27.15) have been established only for the total angular 
momentum of spin zero (scalar) and spin one (vector) particles. Never- 
theless we adopt them as the defining equations for the angular momen- 
tum and for the rotation group generators in the general case. The 
generators of a Lie group form the basis of a Lie algebra; this algebra is 
1 Wigner, op. cit. 



2«W QUANTUM MECHANICS 

closed in the sense that the commutator of any pair of generators is a 
linear combination of the generators. Our next task will be to solve the 
algebraic relations (27.15) in order to obtain explicit matrices for the 
J's and hence for the infinitesimal elements of the group. 

Once the J matrices are known, it is an easy matter to extend the 
infinitesimal rotation operators given by Eqs. (27.12) and (27.13) to 
finite rotations. Suppose we wish to find U R ($) for some finite rotation 
&lt;&gt;. We choose coordinate axes so that one of them, say the x axis, is 
along &lt;&gt;. Then the effect of a small increase in the magnitude of &lt;j&gt;, from 
&lt;£ to &lt;f&gt; + A&lt;£, is to follow the finite rotation U R (&lt;t&gt;) by the infinitesimal 
rotation 1 — (i/h) A&lt;pJ x , to give 

U R (&lt;j&gt; + A4&gt;) « (l - I A$j\ UM 



Thus U R (&lt;I&gt;) satisfies the differential equation 
—dj---1 i J *U R (4&gt;) 

together with the boundary condition U R (0) = 1. This equation is 
readily integrated to give 

U R (4&gt;) = e-*^xM 

Since no restriction was involved in the choice of the x axis for &lt;}&gt;, we 
obtain 

£/«(«&gt;) = exp "** ' J (27.16) 

as the operator for finite rotations. 

CHOICE OF A REPRESENTATION 

We now solve Eqs. (27. 15) of the Lie algebra in a manner similar to that 
used for the harmonic oscillator in Sec. 25. We have three hermitian 
dynamical variables, J x , J y , and J z , no one of which commutes with any 
other. Thus not more than one of them can be made diagonal. How- 
ever we can construct J 2 from them, and it is easily seen that it commutes 
with each component of J. In analogy with the energy representation 
in the oscillator problem, we now choose a representation in which J 2 and 
one of the components, say J z , are diagonal. 

Just as in the oscillator problem it was more convenient to work 
with p ± imw c x than with x and p, so it proves to be more convenient 
now to work with J x ± U v than with J x and J y . We therefore define 
the nonhermitian operators 

J+ = J x + {Jy J_ = J x ~ Uy (27.17) 

which are hermitian adjoints of each other and play a role similar to the 
raising and lowering operators in the oscillator problem. It is evident 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS M1 

that J± commute with J 2 , and the other commutation relations become 
[J.,J + ] = hJ + [J.,J-] = -hJ- [J+,J-] = 2hJ, (27.18) 

We label the rows and the columns of our representation with a 
pair of numbers j and m. It is convenient to choose the eigenvalues of 
J z to be equal to mh, where m is a set of dimensionless real numbers. 
However, the relation between j and the eigenvalues of J 2 will be left 
open for the present; these eigenvalues will be written f(JW, where /(j) 
is a dimensionless function of j. In our representation, then, the matrices 
for J 2 and J z are 

(jm\P\fm') = f(j)h* **' Sw &lt;jm\J.\j'm') = mh S jy b mm &gt; (27.19) 
Further, since J± commute with J 2 , they are diagonal in j although not 
in m. 

The first of Eqs. (27.18) may be written in this representation as 

(jm\J,\j'm')(fm'\J + \J"rn") - (jm\J+\j'm')(j'm'\J z \j"m") 

= h(jm\J+\j"m") 

where the summation symbols for / and m! have not been written 
explicitly. Both sides of this equation vanish unless f(j) = /(/) = /(/')• 
We then obtain, with the help of the second of Eqs. (27.19), 

(m - m" - l)(jm\J+\jm") = (27.20) 

Thus {jm\J+\jm") fails to vanish only when m = m" + 1. This means 
that the result of operating with J+ on the ket \jm") is some multiple 
of the ket \j, m" + 1), so that «/+ is a raising operator on the eigenvalues 
of Jz. In similar fashion, the second of Eqs. (27.18) leads to 

(m - m" + \){jm\J -\jm") = (27.21) 

so that J- is a lowering operator. 

We can thus write the non vanishing matrix elements of «/+ and its 
hermitian adjoint J- in the forms 

(j, m + l|/ + |jm&gt; = X m h (jm\JJ[j, m + 1&gt; = Kh (27.22) 

Substitution of the matrix elements (27.22) into the third of Eqs. (27.18) 
shows that the off-diagonal elements vanish on both sides, and a typical 
diagonal element is 

|\ m -i| 2 - |X m | 2 = 2m (27.23) 

It should be noted that X m may depend on j as well as on in. 

VALUES OF m, f(j), AND Xm 

Equation (27.23) is a first-order linear difference equation in |X m | 2 , and 
its general solution has one arbitrary constant: 

|X m | 2 = C - m(m + 1) (27.24) 



202 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Now |X m | 2 is necessarily positive or zero, and yet the right side of (27.24) 
evidently attains negative values for sufficiently large positive and nega- 
tive values of m. This does not cause difficulty if there are two values 
m x and m 2 of m for which \ m = and if these two values differ from each 
other by an integer. If this is the case, the series of m values in which 
successive terms differ by unity can terminate at both ends without 
|\ m | 2 becoming negative. Equation (27.20) can be satisfied at the upper 
end (m = mi) by having (j, m x + l\J + \j mi ) = rather than by having 
an eigenvalue of J t greater than nixh. Similarly, Eq. (27.21) can be 
satisfied at the lower end (m = m 2 ) by having (jm 2 \J-\J, m 2 + 1) = 
rather than by having an eigenvalue of J z less than (m 2 + l)h. |X m | 2 
is evidently nonnegative for m values that range from m 2 + 1 up to m x , 
inclusive. 

We thus have a finite series of values of m ranging from mi down 
to m 2 + 1 by unit steps, where mi and m 2 are the larger and smaller 
roots of the quadratic equation C — m(m +1) =0: 

mi = - i + i(l + 4C)* m 2 = - i - i(l + 4C)* 

Since m 2 + 1 is equal to —mi, the series of m values ranges from mi to 
— mi by unit steps, which means that 2m x must be a positive integer or 
zero. Thus mi is restricted to the series of values 0, |, 1, f , . . . and 
C = mi(mi + 1). 

In order to evaluate f(j), we calculate the jm diagonal matrix ele- 
ment of J 2 = UJ+J- + J-J+) + Jz 2 . The result is 

fUW = i|\ m _i| 2 ft 2 + i|X m | 2 ft 2 + m 2 fc 2 
= Ch* = m,(mi + l)ft 2 

where use has been made of Eq. (27.24). We rename mi, which is the 
largest value of m for a given series, and call it j, so that the eigenvalues 
of J 2 are j(j + l)^ 2 , where j is zero or a positive integer or half an odd 
integer. For each value of j, there are 2j + 1 values of m that range 
by integer steps from ./ to —j. The non vanishing matrix elements of the 
raising and lowering operators are obtained from Eqs. (27.22) and (27.24) 
and may be written in various equivalent ways : 

(j, m + \\J + \jm) = [j(j + 1) - m(m + l)]*ft 

= [0'-m)0 + m+ l)fh 

(j, m - \\J-\jm) = [j(j + 1) - m(m - l)]*ft 

= [U + m)(j -m + l)]»ft (27.25) 

Jz\jm) = mh\jm) 

J±\M) = [j(j + 1) - m(m ± l)]*h\j, m ± 1) 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 



203 



An arbitrary phase factor has been set equal to unity, in conformity with 
the usual convention. 

ANGULAR MOMENTUM MATRICES 

Our choice of a representation in which J 2 and J z are diagonal has led to 
discrete sequences of values for the corresponding labels j and m. The 
infinite matrices thus obtained are most conveniently handled by break- 
ing them up into an infinite set of finite matrices, each of which is char- 
acterized by a particular value of j and has 2j + 1 rows and columns. 
For j = 0, J 2 and the components of J are all represented by null 
matrices of unit rank: [0]. The matrices for the next three values of j 
are obtained by using Eqs. (27.17) and (27.25): 



J =*: 



j = 1: 



J =#: 



-»[! o] 



./* = 



/. 



'"**[* oj 

*-* [J i] 



h 


"0 1 0" 




V2 


1 1 
1 






"1 0" 


h 










- 


1 



J. = 



V2 



P = 2h* 



"0 —i 


" 


i -* 


i 


"1 0" 




1 




1 





J v — ~%fl 



J z = u 



V3 
V3 2 
2 
V3 


col 
1 1 






-iy/3 
tV3 
2t 





-2i 



t'V3 










3 
1 
0-1 
0- 


0" 


-3 




P = 


^ 2 



(27.26) 



1 














1 














1 














1 



20 * QUANTUM MECHANICS 

CONNECTION WITH SPHERICAL HARMONICS 

Comparison of the foregoing results with those of Sec. 14 suggests a 
close connection between the angular momentum matrices, for which 
j = I is an integer, and the spherical harmonics Yi m (9,&lt;f&gt;) defined in Eq. 
(14.16). The eigenvalue equations (14.22) and (14.23) are consistent 
with the diagonal forms of the J 2 and J z matrices, respectively. Further, 
the L± can be expressed as differential operators with the help of Eqs. 
(14.20) : 



L ¥ = L x + ih y = he* f — + i cot — j 
L- = L x — iL y = her* ( — — + i cot — j 



(27.27) 



It is then possible, by using the properties of the spherical harmonics 
discussed in Sec. 14, to show that 

L + Y lm (6,&lt;j&gt;) = [1(1 + 1) - m(m + l)]^r J&gt;m+1 (0,&lt;£) 

L_Y lm (6,&lt;t&gt;) = U(l + 1) ~ m(m - l)]^,^^) (27&lt;28) 

as would be expected from Eqs. (27.25). 

It is apparent that the spherical harmonics can be regarded as 
constituting a unitary transformation from the angular momentum to 
the angular coordinate representation, in accordance with the trans- 
formation theory developed in Sec. 23 : 

Yi m (d,&lt;f&gt;) = (0&lt;i&gt;\lm) (27.29) 

In using Eq. (27.29), it must be remembered that the weight function 
sin 6 is to be included whenever an angular coordinate integration is 
performed. 

SPIN ANGULAR MOMENTUM 

Since the orbital angular momentum L = r xpis expressed in terms of 
the coordinates and momenta, the quantity L 2 is not in general a con- 
stant of the motion. Thus the quantum number I need not be well 
defined and cannot be used to characterize a particle except in very 
restricted circumstances. It is, however, possible to have an angular 
momentum S that satisfies the fundamental commutation relations 
(27.15) and such that S 2 commutes with all dynamical variables; a 
necessary condition is that S not be expressed in terms of r and p. Then 
S 2 is strictly a constant of the motion and can be replaced by the number 
s(s + l)^ 2 , where s is an integer or half an odd integer. We have already 
seen an example of such an intrinsic spin angular momentum, in which 
a vector wave function was found to have s = 1. As expected, this wave 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 205 

function has 2s + 1 = 3 components, and the spin matrices (27.11) are 
essentially the same as the matrices in (27.26) that correspond toy = 1. 
The second set of matrices may be obtained from the first by a unitary 
transformation that merely has the effect of regrouping the components 
of the vector wave function (see Prob. 7). 

It is found experimentally that electrons, protons, neutrons, neu- 
trinos, and m mesons (muons) each have s = |, photons have s = 1, and 
ir mesons (pions) have s = 0. There are also other shorter-lived particles 
and aggregates of particles that are characterized by definite values of 
the spin angular momentum. 1 

COVERING GROUP 

The angular momentum matrices that correspond to half-odd-integer 
values of j cannot represent pure orbital angular momenta and so can 
appear in nature only in connection with spin. A particle or system 
that has j = £, f , . . . has the following interesting property. Suppose 
that a state of such a system is rotated through 2w radians. For conven- 
ience we choose the axis of rotation to be the z axis and calculate the 
rotation operator from Eq. (27.16): 

t/fl(27r) = «r«"V./» 

Since the J z matrices given in Eqs. (27.26) are diagonal, U r (2tt) is also 
diagonal and has eigenvalues e~ uim t where m is half an odd integer. Thus 
Ur(2tt) is equal to —1 times the unit matrix. It is easily seen that this 
result applies to rotation of 2v radians about any axis, since the com- 
ponent of J in that direction can always be chosen to be diagonal. 

We conclude that rotation of a half-odd-integer spin particle through 
2w radians changes the sign of its state function. An integer spin parti- 
cle is unchanged by a 2ir rotation, whereas a half-odd-integer spin particle 
requires a 47r rotation to return to itself. Since s = \ particles actually 
occur in nature, this result cannot be dismissed as a mathematical 
curiosity. That there is no conflict with experience follows from the fact 
that the wave function itself is not a directly measurable quantity. 
Rather, bilinear combinations of the wave functions appear in the results 
of measurements, and these do not change sign on 2x rotation. 

We see then that half of the matrices that can be used to represent 
J or U R (4&gt;) are double- valued with respect to the vectors &lt;J&gt;. This suggests 
that these representations could be made single-valued by distinguishing 
between *&gt;'s that differ by a 2ir rotation, for example, by enlarging the 

1 See, for example, K. Nishijima, "Fundamental Particles" (Benjamin, New York, 
1964); S. Gasiorowicz, "Elementary Particle Physics," pt. Ill (Wiley, New York, 
1966); A. H. Rosenfeld, A. Barbaro-Galtieri, W. J. Podolsky, L. R. Price, P. Soding, 
C. G. Wohl, M. Roos, and W. J. Willis, Rev. Mod. Phys. 39, 1 (1967). 



206 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

sphere of radius ir that contains the endpoints of these vectors into a 
sphere of radius 2ir. As before, the weight function for the group space 
is not constant throughout the sphere. This provides a geometrical 
isomorphism to a new group, which has twice as many elements as the 
rotation group. Although the rotation group is doubly connected, the 
new group is seen to be simply connected since the entire surface of the 
sphere of radius 2tt corresponds to a single element of the group. This 
new group is called the universal covering group, or simply the covering 
group, of the rotation group. It is said to be homomorphic onto the rota- 
tion group since to each element of the covering group there corresponds 
one and only one element of the rotation group, to each element of the 
rotation group there corresponds at least one element (actually two) of 
the covering group, and there is a correspondence with respect to group 
multiplication. 1 

UNITARY AND SPECIAL UNITARY GROUPS IN TWO DIMENSIONS 

The lowest-rank nontrivial representation of the generators of the rota- 
tion group are the first three matrices of Eqs. (27.26), which we write 
in the form 

J = iftd 

*-[!!] *-[! ol -R -!] (2730) 

The a's are called the Pauli spin matrices, since they were first discovered 
in connection with electron spin. 2 The £/«(&lt;» generated in accordance 
with Eqs. (27.16) and (27.30) have two rows and columns and are double- 
valued with respect to the vectors 4&gt;, so that the Pauli matrices generate 
a representation of the covering group. It is apparent that, since J is 
hermitian, U R ($) is unitary. 

It is easily seen that the set of all unitary matrices with two rows and 
columns form a group for which the combination process is matrix multi- 
plication. This is the unitary group in two dimensions, designated U(2). 
However, this group is larger than the group of matrices U R ($) con- 
structed from (27.16) and (27.30) with all real vectors &lt;&gt;, since the 
matrices that appear in the exponent of U R (§) have zero trace. Now, 
from Eq. (22.22), 

det(e A ) = e tr(A) (27.31) 

Since the trace of each component of d is zero, the £/*(«j&gt;) have unit 
determinant. Thus the covering group is what is called the special 

1 Wigner, op. cit., p. 249. 

* W. Pauli, Z. Physik 43, 601 (1927); electron spin is discussed more fully in Sec. 41. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 207 

unitary group or the unitary unimodular group in two dimensions, desig- 
nated SU(2), which is the group of all 2 X 2 unitary matrices with deter- 
minant equal to +1. These matrices do in fact form a group since the 
unimodular property is preserved in matrix multiplication. 

THE GROUPS C7(n) AND SU(n) 

A unitary matrix that has n rows and columns can be written in the form 

U = e iB (27.32) 

where H is a hermitian matrix that has n rows and columns. All such 
matrices U clearly form a group, designated U(n), for which the combina- 
tion process is matrix multiplication. The diagonal matrix elements of 
H are real, and the off-diagonal elements symmetrically located with 
respect to the principal diagonal are complex conjugates of each other. 
Thus H, and hence also U, is characterized by n 2 independent parameters. 
The group U(n) is easily seen to be a continuously connected, ^-param- 
eter, compact Lie group. 

The trace of any hermitian matrix is real, and the determinant of 
any unitary matrix is a complex number of unit magnitude, so that in 
accordance with Eqs. (27.31) and (27.32) 

tr (H) = a det(U)=e ia a real (27.33) 

Thus if the determinant of U is required to be equal to +1, a single 
constraint is placed on the n 2 parameters, since then a = (mod27r). 
These matrices also form a continuously connected, compact Lie group. 
It is designated SU(n) and has n 2 — 1 parameters. Every member of 
SU(n) is clearly a member of U{n), but the converse is not true. SU(n) 
is therefore said to be a subgroup of U(n). 

We denote a typical member of SU(n) by U , where 

U = e*'*« tr (Ho) = det (£/„) = 1 (27.34) 

Then from a typical member of U(n), characterized by Eqs. (27.32) and 
(27.33), we may construct a corresponding matrix U such that 

H = #o + ^l U = (e-/»l)C/ = U (e ia t n l) 

where 1 is the n-dimensional unit matrix, and U and H are related by 
(27.34). The numbers e*" 1 " are 1 X 1 unitary matrices that constitute 
the group U(l), and the n X n matrices e^^l evidently form an n- 
dimensional matrix representation of U(l). Thus any member of U(n) 
can be written as a matrix product of appropriate members of C/(l) and 
SU(n). 



208 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It is not difficult to see that U(n) is a subgroup of U(m), and SU(n) 
is a subgroup of SU(m), provided that n &lt; m. Any member U of U(n) 
can be expanded to an m X m unitary matrix by adding rows and 
columns in the following way: 



[S?] 



(27.35) 



Here 1 is the unit matrix with m — n rows and columns, and O is a 
rectangular null matrix. The corresponding hermitian matrix H can 
be expanded in a similar fashion to 



KS] 



(27.36) 



where clearly (27.35) and (27.36) are related by Eq. (27.32). Thus a 
particular subset of the matrices of U (m) constitute a matrix representa- 
tion of U(n), and similarly for SU(m) and SU(n). 

GENERATORS OF U(n) AND SU(n) 

The generators of any Lie group are defined in terms of the group 
elements that are infinitesimally close to the unit element, in analogy 
with Eq. (27.6). Thus, if the group has s parameters, the s generators 
Xy specify an infinitesimal element of the group in terms of s infinitesimal 
real parameters &lt;fo: 

i + * X *&gt; x &gt; 

} = 1 

For U(ri), the generators may be taken to be any n 2 linearly independent 
hermitian matrices with n rows and columns. Since i times the com- 
mutator of any pair of these is also hermitian, it can be expressed as a 
linear combination of the generators. Hence the Lie algebra of U(n) is 
closed. In the same way, the generators of SU(n) may be taken to be 
any w 2 — 1 linearly independent traceless hermitian matrices with n rows 
and columns. Again, i times the commutator of any pair of these is 
also hermitian and traceless, and so the algebra is closed. 

In the case n = 2, the special unitary group has 2 2 — 1 = 3 param- 
eters, which may be taken to be the three components of the real vector 
&lt;j&gt;. A convenient choice for the three generators is that defined by Eqs. 
(27.30), which is consistent with the commutation relations (27.15). It 
is apparent that no two of the three generators commute with each other. 
The rank of a group is defined to be the maximum number of mutually 
commuting generators, so that SU(2) is of rank 1. 

We found earlier in this section that a particular representation of 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 



209 



a Lie algebra, and hence of the group generated by the algebra, is con- 
veniently specified by choosing as many operators to be diagonal as 
possible. Thus we started with the 0(3) algebra, defined by the com- 
mutation relations (27.14) or (27.15), and chose a representation in which 
the commuting operators J z and J 2 are diagonal, as in (27.19). Solution 
of Eqs. (27.15) then led to half -odd-integer as well as to integer values 
of j and hence to the recognition that the covering group of 0(3) is SU(2). 
In this way the operator J 2 , constructed from the generators, played an 
essential role in determining the representations. 

According to a theorem of Racah, 1 the number of independent 
operators that can be constructed from the generators, like J 2 above, 
and that commute with all the generators of a Lie group, is equal to the 
rank of the group. It was first recognized by Casimir 2 that one such 
operator can always be formed by taking a suitable bilinear combination 
of the generators; they are therefore called Casimir operators. Since 
SU(2) is of rank 1, its only Casimir operator is J 2 . 

THE SU(3) GROUP 

The special unitary group in three dimensions has 3 2 — 1 = 8 generators, 
Xi, . . . , X 8 , which may be chosen in many convenient ways. Since 
SU(2) is a useful subgroup of &lt;SC/(3), we specify those three generators 
of SU(Z) that are also generators of SU(2) by expanding the Pauli 
matrices (27.30) from two to three rows and columns in accordance with 
(27.36). 



Xi = 



"0 


1 0" 


1 












-i 0] [10 

* x, = -1 

o o oj [o 

(27.37) 

These first three of the eight X's evidently satisfy the same commutation 
relations as the &lt;r's; the relations may be written 



kijOj] = 2i £ cyjfco-fc i, j, k = x, y, z or 1, 2, 3 



(27.38) 



where e ijk is the fully antisymmetric Kronecker symbol whose only non- 
vanishing values are 



€123 — «231 — *312 = ~ «132 = ~ «321 = — C213 "= 1 



(27.39) 



1 G. Racah, Rend. Lincei 8, 108 (1950); "Group Theory and Spectroscopy," CERN 
preprint 61-8, 1961 (reprint of 1951 lectures at Institute for Advanced Study Prince- 
ton, N.J.). 

2 H. B. G. Casimir, Proc. Roy. Soc. Amsterdam 34, 844 (1931). 



210 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



The remaining five X's may still be chosen in many ways. However, 
since the principal application of the SU(S) algebra is to the classifica- 
tion of elementary particles, we follow the notation adopted in that 
connection: 1 



X 4 = 



X 7 = 



"0 





r 











1 








"0 














— i 


.0 


i 






x 6 = 



-i 

i 



X 6 = 



"0 





0" 








1 





1 






(27.40) 



X 8 = 



\/3 







-2 



It is easily verified that the analog of Eq. (27.38) is 
[X&lt;,X,] = 2i%f iik \ k i,j, k = 1, . . • , 8 



(27.41) 



where f ijk is fully antisymmetric, so that it changes sign when any two 
of its indices are interchanged. The only nonvanishing values of /y* are 
permutations of the following : 



/123 — 1 

/458 = /678 



/l47 = /l65 = /246 = /257 = /345 = /376 — £ (27.42) 



iVs 



Thus /123 is equal to the e m given by (27.39), as expected. 

There are at most two of the eight generators that commute with 
each other, X 8 and one of the first three X's in the present notation, so 
that SU(3) is of rank 2. Thus there are two Casimir operators that 
commute with all the X's. One of these is 



C = f \i 2 



(27.43) 



and the other is a rather complicated sum of trilinear products of the 
X's. 2 It is important to note that the relation [C,\i] = must be estab- 
lished from the operator equations (27.41) to (27.43) and not from the 
particular matrix representation of the X's given by (27.37) and (27.40). 

REPRESENTATION IN TERMS OF COORDINATES AND MOMENTA 

It was noted earlier that the orbital angular momentum operators (27.7) 
satisfy the commutation relations (27.14) for the generators of 0(3) or 
SU(2), provided that the components of r and p satisfy the quantum 

1 M. Gell-Mann and Y. Ne'eman, "The Eightfold Way" (Benjamin, New York, 1964). 
* J. J. de Swart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 916 (1963). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 211 

conditions given. Thus we would expect to be able to identify three 
of the eight generators of SU(3) with the components of L. Once this 
is done, it is reasonable to expect that the other five generators can also 
be represented in terms of coordinates and momenta. Since there are 
five of them, it is natural to attempt to associate them with the five 
components of some quadrupole tensor. 1 We are led in this way to 
consider the following eight quantities as possible representations of the 
eight generators of SU(d) : 

Lx = yp, — zp v L v = zp x — xpz L z = xp v — yp x 

Q xv = axy + Pp x py Qy t = ayz + Pp v p, Q zx = azz + 0p z p x 

(27.44) 

Qo = 2^1 ( * 2 + y2 ~ 2z2) + ivl {p * 2 + *»* ~ 2 ^ 2 ) 

Qi = | (* 2 - y*) + § (p x * - pS) 

where a and /3 are some dimensional real numbers. 

The 28 commutators of these eight operators are readily worked 
out and may then be compared with the commutators of the eight X's, 
given in Eqs. (27.41) and (27.42) . It might at first be thought reasonable 
to identify L x , L y , and L z with multiples of Xi, X 2 , and X 3 , respectively, 
and the commutation relations (27.38) admit of this possibility. How- 
ever, it then turns out to be impossible to find linear combinations of the 
X's that correspond to the five Q's. The reason for this derives from the 
difference between the way in which SU{2) is a subgroup of SU(3) and 
the way in which 0(3) is a subgroup of SU(3). 2 The Pauli matrices 
(27.30), which are the generators of SU(2), were expanded from two to 
three rows and columns to yield the first three X's given in (27.37). On 
the other hand, 0(3) is a subgroup of SU(3) for the reason that the 
rotation matrix R, given in Eq. (27.2), is a 3 X 3 real orthonormal 
matrix with determinant equal to unity and hence a special case of a 
3X3 unitary unimodular matrix. It is clearly impossible to find a 
representation of the typical infinitesimal rotation (27.4) that is of the 
form (27.37), since the third rows and third columns of the latter all 
consist of zeros. This conclusion is not surprising when it is remembered 
that Xi, X 2 , X 3 generate the j — £ representation of SU(2), whereas only 
integer j representations can be expressed in terms of coordinates and 
momenta. 

1 J. P. Elliott, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A245, 128 (1958). 

* H. J. Lipkin, "Lie Groups for Pedestrians," sec. 4.2 (North Holland Publishing 

Company, Amsterdam, 1965). 



212 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The proper identification is obtained by writing (27.4) in a form 
like (27.6) : 

R » 1 — T _ (&lt;j&gt; • L) 6 infinitesimal 

n 

It then follows from comparison with (27.37) and (27.40) that 

L x = ftX 7 L v = -h\ h L z = ftX 2 (27.45) 

The remaining identifications are obtained by comparing the commuta- 
tion relations of the L's and Q's with those of the X's : 

Q xy = ft VaP Xi Qvz = * Vctf X 6 Qzz = K V*P &gt;U 

Q = K V^ X 8 Qi = fi V^P X 3 (27.46) 

The Casimir operator (27.43) is, in this representation, 

C = K~ 2 L 2 + (WaP)- l (Q xv * + Q vz 2 + Q 2X 2 + Qo 2 + Qi 2 ) 



= -3 + (3ft 2 )- 1 



(!)*"+ ©'-]* (-«) 



We return in Sec. 30 to this coordinate-momentum representation 
of SU(3), in connection with the three-dimensional isotropic harmonic 
oscillator. 



28DCOMBINATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM STATES 
AND TENSOR OPERATORS 

A central problem of the old quantum theory was the combination of 
the angular momenta associated with two parts of a system (such as the 
orbital angular momenta of two electrons in an atom, or the spin and 
orbital angular momenta of the same electron) to form the angular 
momentum of the whole system. The vector model solved this problem 
with an addition rule : The magnitude of the sum of two angular momen- 
tum vectors can have any value ranging from the sum of their magnitudes 
(parallel case) to the difference of their magnitudes (antiparallel case), 
by integer steps. This is called the triangle rule, since the magnitudes 
of the tw r o angular momenta and their resultant must form a closed 
triangle (w r hich may have zero area). The vector model also states that 
the sum of the z components of the angular momenta equals that of their 
resultant. 

Both of these rules are valid in quantum mechanics as well. We 
show first that they apply to those linear combinations of products of 
eigenstates of two commuting angular momentum operators that are 
eigenstates of the total angular momentum. The same kind of addition 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 213 

formula is then shown to hold for products of rotation or tensor operators 
and for the state produced when a tensor operator acts on an angular 
momentum eigenstate. 

It is apparent that any number of angular momentum eigenstates 
and tensor operators can be combined by taking them two at a time in 
accordance with the methods developed in this section. However, anal- 
ogous procedures have also been worked out for the direct combination 
of three or more angular momentum eigenstates. 1 

EIGENVALUES OF THE TOTAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM 

We start with two commuting angular momentum operators Ji and J 2 ; 
all components of Ji commute with all components of J2, and Ji and J2 
separately satisfy the commutation relations (27.15). The orthonormal 
eigenstates of Ji 2 and Ju are \jimi), and J2 has no effect on them. Simi- 
larly, \ juris) are orthonormal eigenstates of J 2 2 and J 2z , and Ji has no 
effect on them. This representation is specified by the orthonormal set 
of kets \j\m1j2m2), each of which is a product of the kets \jimi) and 
\j2tri2); any other parameters that may be needed to specify the kets can 
be ignored in what follows. 

Since Ji and J 2 commute, the total angular momentum J = Ji ,+ J 2 
also satisfies Eq. (27.15). The orthonormal eigenstates of J 2 and J z are 
\jm) and specify a second representation. We wish to find the unitary 
transformation (rotation of axes in Hilbert space) that changes from one 
of these representations to the other. It is, however, unnecessary to 
deal with the entire infinite-dimensional Hilbert space at once. Instead, 
we consider the subspace for which ji and ji have definite values; its 
dimensionality is (2j'i + 1)(2 &lt; 7' 2 + 1). With this restriction, the kets of 
the first representation may be denoted simply |wim 2 ), and our object 
is to find the unitary transformation (mim-^jm). Then in analogy with 
the first of Eqs. (23.4'), we have 

\jm) = \m 1 m 2 )(mw2\jm) (28.1) 

where summations over mi from —jx to j% and over ra 2 from —j 2 to j\ 
are implied. 

Since J z = J u + «/ 2 «, it is apparent that {mim^jm) is zero unless 
m = mi + m 2 . This immediately gives the second vector-model rule 
mentioned at the beginning of this section. It also follows that the 
largest value of m is jf 1 + j 2 and that this value occurs only once, when 
mi = j\ and m 2 = j\- This shows that the largest value of j is j\ -j- j 2 
and that there is only one such state. The next largest value of m is 
ji + J2 — 1, and this occurs twice: when m x == ,71 and m 2 = j* — 1, and 

1 See, for example, A. R. Edmonds, "Angular Momentum in Quantum Mechanics," 
chap. 6 (Princeton, Princeton, N.J., 1957). 



214 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

when mi = j\ — 1 and ra 2 = j 2 (provided that neither j\ nor j 2 is zero). 
One of the two linearly independent combinations of these two states 
must be associated with the new state for which j = ji + j 2 , since for 
that j value there must be values of m ranging from j\ + ji to —ji — j 2 
by integer steps. The other combination cannot be associated with this 
or a larger j, since the larger m values that would then also be present 
actually are not. Therefore the second combination is associated with 
j = ji + j 2 — 1, and there is only one state with this j value. By an 
extension of this argument we can see that each j value, ranging from 
ji + ji to \j\ — j%\ by integer steps, appears just once. This establishes 
the triangle rule of the vector model. 

Each j value of the new representation has associated with it 2j + 1 
linearly independent combinations of the original eigenstates. Thus the 
number of \jm) eigenstates is 

I (2/ + 1) 
y-iii— y»i 

which is equal to (2ji + l)(2/ 2 + 1), as expected. 

CLEBSCH-GORDAN COEFFICIENTS 

The elements of the unitary matrix (mnn2\jm) are the coefficients of the 
expansion of the eigenstates \jm) in terms of the eigenstates \niim 2 ), in 
accordance with Eq. (28.1). They are called Clebsch-Gordan, Wigner, or 
vector-coupling coefficients. The inverse expansion to (28.1) is 

\mnn 2 ) = \jm)(jm\mim 2 ) 

where summations over m from — .;' to j and over j from \ji — j 2 \ to 
j\ + ji are implied. The unitary character of the transformation matrix 
is expressed through the analogs of Eqs. (23.9') and (23.29) : 

(mim 2 \jm)(jm\m'iin 2 ) = (mim 2 \m'im 2 ) 
{jm\mym 2 )(m\m 2 \j'm') = (jm\j'm') (28.2) 

(jm\mim 2 ) = (mim 2 \jm)* 

The right sides of the first two of Eqs. (28.2) are unit matrices (products 
of Kronecker S symbols). We shall follow the usual convention and 
choose the matrix elements to be real, so that the asterisk may be removed 
on the right side of the third of Eqs. (28.2). 

It is possible to obtain explicit formulas for the Clebsch-Gordan 
coefficients. 1 However, they are sufficiently complicated so that it is 
generally simpler either to construct the coefficients as needed in particular 

Edmonds, op. tit., pp. 44-45. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 215 

cases or to refer to published tables. 1 In what follows we first derive 
two recursion relations and then construct some simple cases. 

RECURSION RELATIONS 

We apply the angular momentum raising operator J+ defined by Eq. 
(27.17) to the left side of Eq. (28.1), and the equal operator J i+ + «/ 2+ 
to the right side. On making use of the first of Eqs. (27.25) and dividing 
by fi, we obtain 

[j(j + 1) - m(m + l)]*|i, m + 1&gt; 

= UiiCii + 1) - mi(mi + 1)]*K + 1, m 2 ) + 

[jt(J* + 1) — w 2 (m 2 + l)]*|»ii, m 2 + l)}(mim s \jm) 

We can now substitute for \j, m + 1) on the left side from Eq. (28.1). 
On the right side we note that the summation over mi may be replaced 
by a summation over m[ = mi + 1 in the first term; it is easily seen that 
the summation range of m[ can also be taken to be — ji to ji. Similarly, 
the summation over m 2 may be replaced by the same summation over 
m 2 + 1 in the second term on the right side. Since the kets |mim 2 ) are 
orthonormal, we can then equate their coefficients on the two sides to 
obtain 

U(J + 1) - ™&gt;(m + l)] i (mim 2 |y, m + 1) 

= UiUi + 1) — »i(wi — l)]*(»»i - 1, m 2 \jm) 

+ [i»0"i + 1) ~ ™ 2 (m 2 - l)]*(wi, m 2 - l\jm) (28.3) 

This procedure may be repeated, starting with «/_ instead of J + . 
The result is 

U(J + 1) — m(m — l)]*&lt;miwj|j, m - 1) 

= fjiO'i + 1) — »i(«i + l)] } (wi + 1, m 2 \jm) 

+ Ut(J* + 1) ~ ™ 2 (m 2 + l)]*&lt;mi, m 2 + l|ym&gt; (28.4) 

CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE 

The matrix (mimtljm) has (2ji + 1)(2^ 2 + 1) rows and columns but 
breaks up into disconnected sub matrices in accordance with the value 
of m = mi + m 2 . Thus there will be a 1X1 submatrix for which 
m = ji + ji and .; = j\ + j 2 . Then there will be a 2 X 2 submatrix for 
which m = ji + j 2 — 1 and j is either j\ + ji or ji + j* — 1. The rank 

1 A list of tables published prior to 1957 is given by Edmonds, op. cit., p. 50; see also 
M. Rotenberg, R. Bivins, N. Metropolis, and J. K. Wooten, Jr., "The 3-j and 6-j 
Symbols" (Technology Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1959). Rosenfeld et al., op. cit., 
give the matrices for several values of ji and j 2 in condensed form on a detachable 
wallet card. 



216 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

of these submatrices at first increases by unity from one to the next until 
a maximum rank is reached and maintained for one or more submatrices; 
thereafter it decreases by unity until the last 1X1 submatrix has 
m = —jx — ji and j = ji + j 2 . Each of these submatrices is unitary, 
so that the first 1 X 1 submatrix is a number of unit magnitude, which 
we choose by convention to be + 1 : 

0'iiilii + j*&gt; jx + ji) = 1 (28.5) 

We next use Eq. (28.4) with mi = j lf m 2 = j 2 — 1, j = j x + j 2 , and 
m = ji -\- j 2 . The first term on the right side is zero, and we obtain 

(jx, j, - i\ji + jt, jx + j* - i) = (V^rrY (28.6) 

V 1 + Ji/ 

when use is made of (28.5). Similar use of Eq. (28.4) with mi = ji — 1, 
m* = J2, j = jx + ji, and m = ji + j 2 gives 

(jx - 1, J2\jx + J2, jx + j* - 1) - (V-WV (28.7) 

V1+J2/ 

Equations (28.6) and (28.7) give the half of the 2 X 2 submatrix 
of (m\m 2 \jm) for which m — j\ + y 2 — 1 and j = j\ + j 2 . The other 
half, for which m = ji + ,72 — 1 and j = .71 + j 2 — 1, is obtained by 
making use of the second orthonormality relation (28.2). There is, 
however, an arbitrary multiplying factor of unit magnitude, which we 
choose so that 

^ l+ 'V (28.8) 

0'i - 1, ill* + i* - 1, ii + i« - i) = - (t^tt ) 

\Jx + 3%/ 

The convention here is that the first matrix element, which has the form 
0'i&gt; j — j\\jj), is real and positive. 

The next submatrix may be obtained in similar fashion. Sub- 
stitution of Eqs. (28.6) and (28.7) into the right side of (28.4) gives 



(JX, ji - 2\J! + j t , J! + J2 - 2&gt; 




f jtQjt-D 

I(jx+J2)&amp;jx + 2J 2 - 


^ 


(JX - 1, ji ~ 1\JX + ji, JX + J2 - 2) 




r 4jrf* 

l(ji+jz)(2j 1 + 2j 2 - 


-»]' 


(jx - 2, j 2 \J! + j t , jx + j 2 - 2&gt; 




r jx(2ji - 1) 


i» 


L0'i+i»)(2ii + 2i, 


-dJ 



(28.9) 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 217 

In the same way, Eqs. (28.4) and (28.8) lead to 
0'i, j% - 2|ii + it - 1, ji + h - 2) 

» r ji(2ji - 1) 1* 

LO'i+iOO"i+i.-i)J 
0'i - if i» - ilii + ii - i» ii + i« - 2 &gt; 

ix-i, (28.10) 



[0'i+it)0"i+i«-i)]* 

0"i - 2, ja|ji + ji - 1, Ji + Jj - 2 ) 



Lo'i+y»)0"i+i«- i)J 



We again use the second of Eqs. (28.2) to obtain a normalized set 
of coefficients that are orthogonal to (28.9) and (28.10). As with Eqs. 
(28.8), we choose the arbitrary phase factor so that the first of the follow- 
ing coefficients is real and positive: 

0"ii i» - 2|ii + j 2 - 2, 3 \ + h - 2) 

= [ ji(2ji - 1) 1» 

L(ii+ii-i)«;i + 3;.-i)J 

0'i - 1, i» - l|ii + h - 2, ji + h - 2) 

_ _ r (2 3 \ - iKzj t - i) ]* 
&lt;ii - 2, i,|ii + i, - 2, y! + &gt; 2 - 2) 

, r j 2 (2j 2 - i) i* 

L(ii+ii-i)(2ji + jyi-i)J 

The only difficult part of the foregoing construction procedure is 
the use of orthogonality, which becomes progressively more complicated 
as the rank of the sub matrix increases. However, it need be employed 
only once for each submatrix, and it is easier to work out an example 
with particular numerical values for j\ and 32 than the general case just 
considered. It should be noted that the first recursion relation (28.3) 
can also be used to construct the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients if we start 
at the other end with the 1 X 1 submatrix that has m = —j\ — j t and 
i = ii + Jt. 

SOME PARTICULAR COEFFICIENTS 

The detachable wallet card referred to earlier contains condensed tables 
of Clebsch-Gordan coefficients for the seven cases 

ii: * 1 1 I f 2 2 
i.: W 1 * 1 * 1 
The first three of these are reproduced below, written in full. In each case 

the rows of the matrix are labeled by (raira 2 ) and the columns by ( V 



218 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



All the matrix elements outside the dotted lines are equal to zero. It is 
easily verified that Eqs. (28.5) through (28.11) are in agreement with 
these matrices. 



Ji 



J2 


— V' 




1 1 


1 


1 


-1 


1 


r 1 ! 




1 


| vi 


VI 1 

j 


i 


[Vi 


-VI i 


1 




N 



(28.12) 



ii = i 



l 
l 
o 



-1 



ii = i 



3% = i- 



-1 — i 



JL 



1 I 

— T 



Ld.ji^J 

1 VI 



it - 1: 



Vi 



v; -vi ! 



! i 



(28.13) 







2 2 12 
2 110 


1 








2 
-1 


1 2 
-1 -2 




1 
1 


1 




■l_l 

| v* vf\ 














1 


1 

-1 


| Vi 


~~vf 


___.-. 














\vt 





-vi 








-1 




1 
-1 


\_v±_ 


rj^L 


vi 


"vT 


~"vi~j 




-1 
-1 




-1 








vi 


(28 


14) 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS »9 

MATRIX ELEMENTS FOR ROTATED STATES 

In Sec. 26, a comparison was made between a matrix element of a dynami- 
cal variable Q, calculated for any pair of states, and the matrix element of 
the same operator when the states are displaced. Equation (26.6) 
showed in particular that the matrix elements of r for states displaced 
through the vector q are equal to the corresponding matrix elements of 
r + p for the original states. In similar fashion, Prob. 5 shows that the 
matrix elements of r for states rotated through the infinitesimal vector $ 
are equal to the corresponding matrix elements of r + &lt;&gt; X r for the 
original states. 

We can thus use the analog of Eq. (26.6) to define an infinitesimally 
rotated operator Q« as 

0* = U R H^QU R ^) « fi + | [fo • J),Q] (28.15) 

where use has been made of Eqs. (27.12) and (27.13). The matrix 
elements of ft for rotated states are equal to the corresponding matrix 
elements of ft« for the original states. It follows that the rotation prop- 
erties of any operator are determined by its commutator with the angular 
momentum. For example, a scalar operator is one that has the same 
matrix elements for rotated states as for the original states, or one for 
which ft« = ft. For such an operator [J,ft] = 0. As another example, a 
vector operator is one for which Eq. (28.15) leads to a relation of the same 
form that (27.3) has for the vector r. Thus Prob. 6 shows that J R « 
J + &lt;[&gt; X J, so that angular momentum is also a vector operator, as 
expected. 

IRREDUCIBLE TENSOR OPERATORS 

Operators with rotation properties of higher order than scalars and vectors 
can also be constructed. For example, two vector operators A and B can 
be combined to form a nine-component tensor operator AiBj, where 
i, j = x, y, z. This is not a convenient form with which to work, any 
more than it is in classical physics; it is customary to use instead the 
scalar product, the vector product or antisymmetric tensor of second rank, 
and the traceless symmetric tensor of second rank, which have one, three, 
and five independent components, respectively. The latter can be shown 
to have the rotation properties of the spherical harmonics Yi m (0,&lt;f&gt;) with 
I = 0, 1, and 2, respectively; they are examples of irreducible tensor opera- 
tors, so called because they have the simplest transformation properties. 1 
As remarked in connection with Eq. (28.15), the commutator with 
J determines the rotation properties of an operator. In order to relate 

1 For further discussion, see U. Fano and G. Racah, "Irreducible Tensorial Sets" 
(Academic, New York, 1959). 



220 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

these to the spherical harmonics Yi m (d,&lt;f&gt;), we operate with J on 
Yim(6,(f&gt;)f(6,4&gt;), where f(d,&lt;f&gt;) is an arbitrary function of the angles. 1 The 
third of Eqs. (14.20) expresses J z as the differential operator —ih(d/d&lt;j&gt;), 
so that 

J,[YiM4&gt;)f(0,&lt;l&gt;)] = j(e,4»)J s Y lm (B,&lt;f&gt;) + Y lm (e,&lt;j&gt;)JJ(d,&lt;l&gt;) 
The first term on the right is mnYi m (0,&lt;t&gt;)f(0,&lt;f&gt;), so that 

[Jz,Yi m (d,&lt;l&gt;)]m&lt;l&gt;) = mhY lm (0,&lt;t&gt;)f(d,&lt;l&gt;) 
Since f(0,&lt;f&gt;) is arbitrary, we obtain the commutation relation 

[Jz,Yim] = mhYi m (28.16) 

In similar fashion, Eqs. (27.27) and (27.28) can be used to obtain 

[J + ,Y lm ] = [1(1 + 1) - m(m + l)]^F,. m+1 

[J-,Y lm ] = [1(1 + 1) - m(m - \)HY l , m _ 1 (28-17) 

In analogy with the preceding paragraph, we now define an irreduci- 
ble tensor operator T(k), where A; = 0, £, 1, f , . . . , to be a set of 2 k + 1 
operators T(k,q), where q = k, k — 1, . . . , — k, that have commutators 
with J similar to those in Eqs. (28.16) and (28.17), where I or j is replaced 
by k and in is replaced by q: 

[Jz, T(k,q)] = qhT(k,q) 

[J+, T(k,q)] = [k(k + 1) - q(q + l)]*hT(k, q + 1) (28.18) 

[J., T(k,q)] = [k(k + 1) - q(q - l)]*hT(k, q - 1) 

The importance of these operators derives from the fact that many 
dynamical variables of physical interest can be expressed in this form. 
For example, the 2 l electric or magnetic multipole moment operator is an 
irreducible tensor operator with k = I. 

PRODUCT OF TENSOR OPERATORS 

The close similarity between Eqs. (27.25) and (27.28) on the one hand, 
and Eqs. (28.18) on the other, suggests that irreducible tensor operators 
can be combined in accordance with the same rule as angular momentum 
eigenstates. Some such rule is needed, since we have seen that the prod- 
uct of two vector operators is reducible. 

We therefore try to adapt Eq. (28.1) to this purpose. Its analog is 

T(k,q) = ^TxQzuqdTtQcttoXqiqAkq) (28.19) 

1 This is the method employed in deriving Eq. (24.34). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 221 

where the Clebsch-Gordan coefficient (qiqi\kq) corresponds to ji = hi and 
j i = k 2 ; the summation is over q\ from —ki to ki and over q 2 from — k 2 to 
k 2 . As before, we apply J 2 , J+, and «/_ in succession. However, in 
developing recursion relations from (28.1), we could apply J to the left 
side and Ji -+- J 2 to the right side. The analogous procedure here derives 
from the identity 

[J,T 1 T 2 ]=U,T 1 ]T 2 +T 1 [J,T 2 ] (28.20) 

Thus if the commutator with J z is taken with both sides of (28.19) we 
obtain 

[J,, T(k,q)] = £{[/„ riCfcitfOlTV**,*/.) 

+ T^kuqdW., T 2 {k 2 ,q 2 ))\{q x q 2 \kq) 
= Jfai + qi)^Ti(ki,qi)T t (k t ,qt)(qiqt\kq) 
= qhT(k,q) 

where use has been made of the first of Eqs. (28. 18) applied to 7\ and T 2 
separately and of the fact that (qiq 2 \kq) is zero unless q = qi + q 2 . Thus 
T(k,q) as defined by (28.19) also satisfies the first of Eqs. (28.18). 
Next we take the commutator of (28.19) with J+; 

[/+, T(k,q)] = ^{[^(fci + 1) - qi ( qi + l)]»ftri(fci, qi + l)T 2 (k 2 ,q 2 ) 

+ [k 2 (k 2 + 1) - g»(«« +'l)J**ri(*i f ffi)r,(A„ q 2 + l)Kfltf«|*g&gt; 

where use has been made of the second of Eqs. (28.18) applied to T x and 
T 2 separately. Now, just as in deriving Eq. (28.3), the summation over 
qi in the first term may be replaced by a summation over q[ — q x + 1, 
with the same range for q[ from — kx to k r . With similar treatment of the 
second term, we obtain 

[/+, T(k,q)] = 

XU*i(*i + i) - q'i(q'i - i)]**ri(*i,gj)r,(fc s ,g 1 )&lt;ft - 1, ? 2 |fc&lt;z&gt; + 

[k 2 (k 2 + 1) - ? ;( g ; - l)nT l (k 1 ,q 1 )T 2 (k 2 ,q f 2 )(q 1 , q' 2 - \\kq)\ 

We may now drop the primes and use the recursion relation (28.3) to 
simplify the right side : 

[J+, T(k,q)] 

= %[k(k + 1) - q(q + l)HT 1 (k 1 ,q 1 )T 2 (k i ,q 2 Xq 1 q 2 \k, 9+1) 

Then substitution from (28.19) with q replaced by q + 1 shows that 
T(A;,gr) satisfies the second of the commutation relations (28.18). In 
similar fashion, the commutator of (28.19) with /_ shows that T(q,k) 
satisfies the third of Eqs. (28.18). 



222 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

We have thus shown that the 2k + 1 operators T(k,q) denned by 
Eq. (28.19) constitute an irreducible tensor operator. The expansion 
(28. 19) can also be inverted by making use of the orthonormality relations 
(28.2) to give the explicit reduction of a product of two irreducible tensors 
if the T(k,q) are known : 

T^qJTtikrtt) = ZT(k,qXkq\q iqa ) = %T(k,q)( qi q a \kq) (28.21) 

The summation here is over q from — k to k, and then over k from \k x — k 2 \ 
to ki -\- k 2 ; the last expression follows from the third of Eqs. (28.2) since 
the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are real. 

COMBINATION OF OPERATOR AND EIGENSTATE 

Finally, we can find the analog of Eqs. (28.1) and (28.19) when one of the 
factors on the right is an irreducible tensor operator and the other is an 
angular momentum eigenstate: 

\jm) = £ri(fci,g 1 )|i,ro 2 )&lt;g 1 m,|./m&gt; (28.22) 

The Clebsch-Gordan coefficient (qim 2 \jm) corresponds to j\ = ki and ,7*2 ; 
the summation is over qi from — fci to ki and over m 2 from —j 2 to j 2 . 
Two matters of notation are worthy of comment in connection with this 
equation. First, we have used subscripts 1 and 2 so that they correspond 
respectively to the first tensor operator on the right side of (28.19) and 
to the second eigenfunction on the right side of (28.1). Second, we have, 
as before, omitted all reference to the parameters other than angular 
momentum quantum numbers which may be needed to specify the states. 
The existence of these other parameters is implied and would in general 
cause the radial dependence, for example, of the ket \jm) to be different 
from that of the ket \j 2 m 2 ). 

The identity analogous to (28.20) that is needed here is 

JT 1 \j 2 m 2 ) = [J,rj|i 2 m 2 &gt; + T J|./ 2 m,&gt; 

The algebra proceeds exactly as in the preceding subsection and leads to 
the conclusion that the set of kets \jm) defined by Eq. (28.22) for a partic- 
ular j and all m between —j and j are angular momentum eigenstates 
since they satisfy equations like (27.25) and (27.28). However, they are 
not normalized, since it is not in general true that (jm\jm) = 1. On the 
other hand, the fact that the \jm) satisfy homogeneous equations like 
(27.28) shows that their normalization does not depend on m, although 
it will in general depend onj, and also on hi, j 2 , and the form of the tensor 
operator Ti. 

WIGNER-ECKART THEOREM 

The series expansion of \jm) in terms of Ti(ki,qi)\j 2 m 2 ), given in Eq. 
(28.22), can be inverted by making use of the orthonormality of the 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 223 

Clebsch-Gordan coefficients : 

Ti(k h q 1 )\j 2 m 2 ) = 2,\jm)(jm\qm t ) = ^\jm)(qim 2 \jm) (28.23) 

The summations are over m from —j to j and over j from \ki — j 2 \ to 
ki + ji', as with Eq. (28.21), use has been made of the third of Eqs. (28.2) 
and the reality of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients to arrive at the last 
expression. 

We may now multiply Eq. (28.23) through from the left with a 
bra (fm'\, which may depend on the other parameters in a different way 
than \jm). On making use of the orthogonality relation 

(j'm'\jm) = unless j = f and m = m' 

we obtain 

(j'm'\T 1 {k 1 ,q 1 )\j 2 m 2 ) = N(j',ki,J2,T 1 )(q 1 m 2 \j'm') 

N == (j'm'lfm') is the normalization factor mentioned at the end of the 
preceding subsection, which is independent of m! '. We drop the primes 
and write AT in a form that agrees with the standard convention: 1 

(jm\Ti(k uqi )\j t m t ) = (-l)*r-*«(2y + l)-*01|Ti(*i)||y,&gt;&lt;giro,|im&gt; 

(28.24) 

Equation (28.24) embodies the Wigner-E chart theorem. 2 It states 
that the matrix element of an irreducible tensor operator between 
angular momentum eigenstates depends on the three m values (qi, m 2 , 
and m) only through the Clebsch-Gordan coefficient (qim 2 \jm) that corre- 
sponds to ji = ki and j 2 . This is not a surprising result, since these 
three m values determine the orientation of the operator and the two 
states with respect to the coordinate system and hence should influence 
the value of the matrix element only through a geometrical factor (the 
Clebsch-Gordan coefficient). The physical properties of the matrix ele- 
ment are contained in the factor 01 |Ti(/ci) 1 1 j 2 &gt;, which is called the reduced 
or double-bar matrix element. It depends on the magnitudes of the three 
angular momenta (ki, j 2 , and j) associated with the operator and the two 
states, on the form of the tensor operator Ti, and on the other parameters 
that are needed to specify the two states. 

This factorization of the matrix elements of tensor operators greatly 
simplifies their calculation. Since ki is an integer for physical operators, 
it is simplest to calculate the reduced matrix element from Eq. (28.24) 
with qi = and with m 2 = m = or m 2 = m = £ as appropriate. 
Matrix elements for other combinations of qi, m 2 , and m are then readily 
obtained. 

1 Edmonds, op. cit., p. 75. 

s Wigner, op. cit., p. 245; C. Eckart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2, 305 (1930). 



224 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Among the most important consequences of the Wigner-Eckart 
theorem are two conditions under which matrix elements of tensor oper- 
ators necessarily vanish. The appearance of the Clebsch-Gordan coeffi- 
cient shows that the matrix element is zero unless m = q x -f- m 2 and 
unless fci, j 2 , and j satisfy the triangle rule. As an example, the latter 
condition shows that a system in a state with total angular momentum 
j cannot have a non vanishing expectation value (diagonal matrix element) 
for the 2 l electric or magnetic multipole moment operator unless I &lt; 2j. 
Thus a particle with spin zero cannot possess a magnetic dipole moment, 
and a particle with spin \ cannot possess an electric quadrupole moment. 

29DSPACE INVERSION AND TIME REVERSAL 

Parity has appeared earlier in this book in connection with both the one- 
dimensional (Sec. 9) and three-dimensional (Sec. 14) Schrodinger equa- 
tions. So long as the potential energy is unchanged when the coordinate 
r is replaced by — r, the energy eigenf unctions can be chosen either to 
remain unchanged or to change sign when r changes sign, that is, to have 
either even or odd parity. We start this section by applying the general 
approach of Sec. 26 to the relation between parity and the symmetry 
operation of space inversion (r— » — r). 

We then consider the symmetry operation of time reversal. The 
classical equations of motion for particles that move under the influence 
of conservative forces are symmetric when the sense of progression of 
time is reversed, since they involve second time derivatives. It is to 
be expected that the corresponding quantum equations also possess time- 
reversal symmetry. However, the fact that the Schrodinger equation is 
of first order in the time derivative whereas the newtonian equations are 
of second order introduces new and physically interesting features into 
the treatment of the quantum situation. 1 

SPACE INVERSION 

The matrix, analogous to R defined in Eq. (27.2), that produces an inver- 



sion is 










"-1 








J = 





-1 













-1 



so that It = — r. It is apparent that / is real and orthonormal, but its 
determinant is equal to —1 so that it is not a proper rotation. Any 
3X3 real orthonormal matrix with determinant equal to —1 can be 

1 For a classical discussion of some aspects of space inversion and time reversal, see 
L. I. Schiff, Physics 1, 209 (1965). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 225 

written as a product of I and a proper rotation. The unit matrix and 
I by themselves form a discrete group with two elements, such that P = 1. 
The inversion of a physical system in a state represented by the 
ket \&lt;x) or the wave function ^ a (r) changes it into a state represented 
by |a') or ^„'( r )- The relation between the two states is assumed to be 

,MJr) = «*«(r) (29.1) 

where w is a number to be discussed below. The introduction of this 
number into (29.1) and its absence from the corresponding equations 
(26.1), (26.7), (27.1), and (27.8) are consequences of the discrete nature 
of the inversion group as contrasted with the continuous nature of the 
displacement and rotation groups. Any such number introduced into 
the earlier equations would have to depend continuously on p, t, or &lt;J&gt;, as 
the case may be, and approach unity as these parameters approach zero 
since |o') = \a) in the limit; it can then be shown not to have any physical 
consequences. 

UNITARY INVERSION OPERATOR 

The unitary inversion operator Ui is defined by 

U T \a) = \a') or Urt a (t) = tfv(r) (29.2) 

Substitution of (29.1) into the second of Eqs. (29.2), followed by another 
operation with Ui, gives 

Urf tt (r) = «*«(-r) C//V«(r) = «Y«(r) (29.3) 

Two inversions bring the coordinate space into itself, so that Ui 2 is 
expected to bring a state into itself. In such a situation, the state cannot 
change its norm, although it may be multiplied by a phase factor of unit 
magnitude. Thus w 2 is a number of unit magnitude, from which it 
follows that w is also. It is also true that w must be the same for all 
states that can be superposed with each other, that is, for all states that 
can be used to describe the same system of particles. For example, if 

*(r) = X a °+°V 

a 

where the a a are some set of numerical coefficients, then 
tf/V(r) =2« a »a a * a (r) 

a 

which will, in general, be a different state from ^-(r) unless the a&gt; 2 are all 
the same. 

We shall assume that u&gt; has a definite value for each kind of particle. 
We have already noted near the end of Sec. 27 that a 2ir rotation of an 



226 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

integer spin particle leaves its state function unchanged, and we expect 
that this is also true for two space inversions. Thus o&gt; 2 = 1, and « = ± 1. 
For half-odd-integer spin particles, we note from Eq. (28. 1) that products 
of pairs of them can be superposed to give states of integer angular 
momentum. Thus we expect that to 2 for a half-odd-integer spin particle 
can be equal to the possible values of w for an integer spin particle. 
These are ± 1, so that a half-odd-integer spin particle can have co = ± 1, 
±i. 

INTRINSIC PARITY 

The experimental determination of a&gt; for various particles involves their 
mutual interactions. 1 In particular, it is found that a tt° meson (neutral 
pion), which has zero spin, disintegrates into two photons, so that its 
intrinsic parity can be found relative to that of the electromagnetic field, 
and corresponds to w = — 1 ; this assumes that the parity of the system 
is conserved during the decay process. The neutral pion is therefore said 
to have odd intrinsic parity, or to be a pseudoscalar particle; this is in 
contrast with a spin zero particle with a&gt; = +1 (should such exist), which 
would be called a, scalar particle. The intrinsic parity of the ir* mesons 
(charged pions), which also have zero spin, cannot be found relative to 
that of the electromagnetic field, since conservation of electric charge 
prevents their decay into photons. However, charged pions can be 
created or destroyed through interactions of nucleons (protons and 
neutrons), and so their intrinsic parity can be found relative to that 
of the nucleons, again if parity conservation during the interaction is 
assumed. Conventional usage assigns even parity to the nucleons and 
odd parity to the pions. 

INVERTED STATES AND OPERATORS 

The equation of motion of an inverted state can be found in the same 
manner as for a displaced state at the beginning of Sec. 26. As expected 
from analogy with Eq. (26.5), it is found that if a particular ket obeys 
the Schrodinger equation the inverted ket does also, provided that 
[Ui,H] = 0. In this case H and U r can be diagonalized simultaneously, 
so that the energy eigenstates can be chosen to have well-defined parities. 
Further, if |a) and Ui\a) are linearly independent, there must be energy 
degeneracy. 

In analogy with the discussion of Eq. (26.6), the matrix elements of 
a dynamical variable Q for inverted states are equal to the corresponding 
matrix elements of Vi'Q.Ui for the original states. Since Ui is defined 

1 C. N. Yang and J. Tiomno, Phys. Rev. 79, 495 (1950) ; G. C. Wick, A. S. Wightman, 
and E. P. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 88, 101 (1952); K. Nishijima, "Fundamental Particles," 
p. 41 (Benjamin, New York, 1964). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 227 

to be unitary, multiplication of the first of Eqs. (29.3) from the left by 
C/r t gives 

* a (r) = «W«(-r) or £W«(r) = arV«(-r) 

We can then evaluate U^tUi by allowing it to operate on an arbitrary 
state ^a(r) : 

so that 

UfrUi = -r (29.4) 

In similar fashion, since p = —ihV and L = r X p, it is easily seen that 

WpUi = -p UiVLUx = L (29.5) 

Since Ur affects the space coordinates but not the spin, we expect that 
it commutes with S and hence also with J = L + S, so that 

USSUi = S USJUt = J (29.6) 

Equations (29.4) to (29.6) are in agreement with what would be expected 
classically from the space-inversion properties of coordinates, momenta, 
and angular momenta. Coordinates and momenta are examples of what 
is called a vector or a polar vector, and an angular momentum is an axial 
vector or a pseudovector. 

TIME REVERSAL 1 

The reversal in time of a state represented by the ket |a) or the wave 
function \f/ a changes it into the ket \a) or the wave function \f/ a &gt; that 
develops in accordance with the opposite sense of progression of time. 
For this new state the signs of all linear and angular momenta are reversed 
but other quantities are unchanged. Time reversal is effected by a time- 
independent operator T such that 

T\a) = W) or T+ a = + a , (29.7) 

We shall assume in what follows that T is a symmetry operation for 
closed isolated physical systems; at present all experimental evidence 
is consistent with this assumption. This means that if \k) or Uk represents 
an eigenstate of the hamiltonian (which is constant in time) with energy 
eigenvalue E k , then T\k) or Tu k also represents an eigenstate with the 
same eigenvalue. 

1 Time reversal was introduced into quantum mechanics by E. P. Wigner, Gottinger 
Nachr. 31, 546 (1932). See also E. P. Wigner, "Group Theory," chap. 26 (Academic, 
New York, 1959). 



228 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

At some particular time, say t = 0, the wave function $ a can be 
expanded in terms of the energy eigenfunctions u k in accordance with 
Eq. (23.22): 

fa = Skd ak U k (29.8) 

We now consider two pairs of operations that can be performed on f a 
that are expected to lead to the same physical state. In the first case we 
allow the state to propagate to time t and then reverse it. In the second 
case we reverse it at t = and then allow the reversed state to propagate 
with the opposite sense of progression of time, that is, to time —t. With 
the first pair of operations, propagation to time t takes the wave function 
(29.8) into 

Ska a ke- iB " tlh u k 

If now we tentatively assume that T is a linear operator (which we shall 
immediately see leads to a contradiction), time reversal gives 

S k a ak e- iE ^ h Tu k (29.9) 

With the second pair of operations, time reversal at t = takes the wave 
function (29.8) into 



Skdak'Tu, 



Since the energy eigenvalue of Tu k is E k , propagation to time — tthen 
gives 

S k a ak e iE ^Tu k (29.10) 

It is apparent that, in general, the wave functions (29.9) and (29.10) are 
not multiples of each other, as they must be if they are to represent the 
same physical state. Thus T cannot be a linear operator. 

ANTILINEAR OPERATORS 

The foregoing contradiction is clearly connected somehow with the oper- 
ation of complex conjugation. This is not surprising, since a change in 
the sign of t in the Schrodinger equation for 4/ a changes it into the equation 
for rp*, provided that H is real and independent of the time. Therefore, 
instead of assuming that T is a linear operator with the property 

T{aaPi + a 2 * 2 ) = axTtyi + a 2 7V 2 
we try the assumption that T has the property 

T(arfi + a 2 ^ 2 ) = atTfa + c£T# s (29.11) 

Such an operator is said to be antilinear. With the assumption (29.11) 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 229 

for T, the two states (29.9) and (29.10) both become 

and the contradiction disappears. 

Application of T to both sides of the Schrodinger equation 

gives 

at 

Thus if T commutes with the hamiltonian, so that 

[T,H] = (29.12) 

then T\l/ a satisfies the Schrodinger equation with t replaced by —t, as 
would be expected. It also follows from (29.12) that Tu k is an energy 
eigenfunction with eigenvalue E k , as assumed above. Thus the condition 
that T is a symmetry operation is that Eq. (29.12) be satisfied. The 
situation here is no different from that with the unitary symmetry oper- 
ations discussed earlier, for example, in connection with Eq. (26.5). 

ANTIUNITARY OPERATORS 

An antilinear operator can be expressed as the product of a linear operator 
and the complex-conjugation operator K, which is defined by 

for an arbitrary function \f/. We note that K 2 = 1. An especially useful 
class of antilinear operators consists of those for which the linear operator 
that multiplies K is unitary; such operators are called antiunitary. It is 
apparent that K itself is antilinear and also antiunitary. It is easily 
shown (Prob. 15) that the inner product of two state functions is changed 
into its complex conjugate when the states are operated on with the same 
antiunitary operator. The same argument shows that the norm of a 
state is unchanged since it is real. It is plausible to expect that the norms 
of states and the absolute magnitudes of the inner products of pairs of 
states are unchanged by time reversal. We therefore assume that T is 
antiunitary and write it in the form 

T = UK (29.13) 

where U is unitary. 

If H is complex, as with the optical-model potential considered in 
Sec. 20, the condition (29.12) requires that U transform H* into H: 



230 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

UH*W = H. There is, in general, no unitary operator that has this 
property, so that the physical system represented by a complex hamil- 
tonian is not time-reversal invariant. 1 This is to be expected, since the 
absorption of particles by a complex potential specifies a particular sense 
of progression of time, as shown in Eq. (20.1). The situation here is 
roughly analogous to friction in classical particle motion or viscosity in 
classical hydrodynamics, which introduces forces that change sign when 
the velocity changes sign, thus destroying time-reversal invariance. 
Both the complex potential in quantum mechanics and friction or 
viscosity in classical mechanics provide simple phenomenological descrip- 
tions of much more complicated situations and do not of themselves imply 
a lack of time-reversal invariance at a more elementary level. 

T FOR A ZERO SPIN PARTICLE 

We now obtain an explicit expression for T such that for the time- 
reversed state the signs of all linear and angular momenta are reversed but 
other quantities are unchanged. The simplest case is a spin zero particle 
in which a state is represented by a one-component wave function. 
Operation on some yj/ a w T ith the coordinate produces a new state which 
we call 4/p : r^ a = fo. If the sign of r is not to change on time reversal, 
we expect this relation to hold also for the time-reversed states; that is, 
if y\/ a , = 7ty a and f? = Tfo, then rtfv = h'- It then follows that 

rT* a = rtfv = **» = T*f&gt; = Tt* a 

Since \p a is an arbitrary state, we have that 

tT = Tr (29.14) 

Operation on \p a with the momentum produces a new state which we 
call xj/y-. pif/ a = \p y . If now the sign of p is to change on time reversal, 
we expect to have for the time-reversed states p\p a &gt; = — ^y. We then 
have 

p7V« = Ptfv = -tfy = -n y = -T^ a 
so that 

pr= -T? (29.15) 

In similar fashion, since L = r X p, 

LT = -TL (29.16) 

In the coordinate representation, r is a real operator and p = — ih V 
is a pure imaginary operator. The simplest choice for T that satisfies 

1 Note that, in spite of this, the reciprocity theorem (20. 16) is valid in this situation. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 



231 



Eqs. (29.14) to (29.16) is then 

U = 1 T = K (29.17) 

This conclusion evidently depends on the choice of representation. Thus 
if we use the momentum representation, in which ^« is a function of p 
rather than of r, then p is a real multiplicative operator and r is pure 
imaginary, for example, x = ifi(d/dp x ). In this case Eq. (29.13) is still 
valid, but U is now the operator that replaces p by - p : U\f/ a (p) = fa ( - p) • 
We shall always work in the coordinate representation, since this is most 
familiar and is also convenient. 

T FOR A NONZERO SPIN PARTICLE 

For a particle with spin, we expect in analogy with Eq. (29.16) that 

ST = -TS and JT = -T] (29.18) 

Since the explicit form of T depends on the representation, we must 
choose a specific set of S matrices when s ^ 0, in addition to the earlier 
choice of the coordinate representation. We have already seen (see 
Prob. 7) that the s = 1 spin matrices (27.11) and the j = 1 matrices in 
(27.26) differ only by a unitary transformation, so that they correspond 
to different choices of representation. When dealing with spin, we shall 
for definiteness always work in the representation specified by Eqs. 
(27.26). 

It then follows that r, S x , and S, are real operators, and p, L, and 
S v are pure imaginary operators. Thus if T were equal to K, Eqs. 
(29.14) to (29.16) and the S y equation in (29.18) would be satisfied but 
the S x and S. equations would not be. We must therefore choose U so 
that it commutes with r, p, L, and S v and so that 

S X U - -175, and S.U = -US. (29.19) 

Thus U may be any unitary operator that is a function only of S y and that 
satisfies Eqs. (29.19). 

We know from Eq. (27.16) that the unitary operator exp (-ty • J/h) 
rotates a state through the vector angle &lt;&gt;. Also, through Eq. (28.15), 
it transforms an operator into the same operator rotated through &lt;&gt;. In 
similar fashion, the unitary operator exp ( — i$ • S/h) transforms any oper- 
ator function of S into the same function in which the argument is the 
result of rotating S through &lt;J&gt;. In particular, «-*» V* is a unitary trans- 
formation that rotates S through ir radians about the y axis and hence 
transforms S x into -S x and &amp; into -S 2 . We may therefore put 

T = e-*'V*/L" (29.20) 

That this T has the desired properties is shown explicitly in Prob. 16. 



232 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

For a spin \ particle, Eq. (29.20) takes the particularly simple form 1 
T = -i&lt;r y K where a y = K ~* I (29.21) 

SYSTEMS OF SEVERAL PARTICLES 

When several particles are present, T may be constructed by multiplying 
together the IPs that correspond to each particle and then multiplying 
this product into K: 

T = e-*&gt;Si„/ft • • • e- irS "y lh K (29.22) 

The order of factors in the product of exponentials is unimportant since 
each operates only on the state of that particle; thus they all commute 
with each other, and T satisfies the first of Eqs. (29.18) for each S. 
Since each S y is pure imaginary, each exponential in (29.22) is real 
and hence commutes with K. Then, since K 2 = 1, we see that 

y2 _ e -iiTS ly /h . . . e -2«vs„ v M 

Each of these exponentials is a rotation through 2w radians. According 
to the discussion in Sec. 27, it is equal to + 1 for an integer spin particle 
and — 1 for a half-odd-integer spin particle. Thus T 2 is equal to + 1 or 
— 1 according as the total number of half-odd-integer spin particles in 
the system is even or odd. 

As remarked below Eq. (29.12), if u k is an energy eigenf unction , 
Tu k is also an energy eigenf unction with the same eigenvalue. We 
suppose at first that there is no degeneracy. Then Tu k represents the 
same state as u k , so that Tu k = cu k , where c is some number, and 

T 2 u k = Tcu k = c*Tu k = |c| 2 w* 

If T 2 = -h 1, then \c\ 2 = 1, which is a possible situation. But if T 2 = - 1, 
there is no number c, which means that there must be some degeneracy. 
In this case, u k and Tu k are orthogonal, as may be seen in the following 
way. It is shown in Prob. 15 that (T\l/ h T\l/ 2 ) = (^ a ,^i). If we choose 
^i = Tu k and \j/ 2 — u k , this relation becomes (T 2 u k ,Tu k ) = (u k ,Tu k ). 
Since T 2 = —1, the left side is the negative of the right side, so that 
both sides are zero and Tu k is orthogonal to u k . Thus for every u k there 
is a distinct Tu k that is degenerate with it, so that the overall degeneracy 
is even. 

For a crystal of low symmetry, each atom is in an unsymmetrical 
environment, and one would not normally expect any degeneracy for the 
states of the electrons in that atom. These electrons are moving in the 

1 &lt;r v is one of the three Pauli spin matrices defined in Eq. (27.30), which are discussed 
more fully in Sec. 41. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 233 

static electric field produced by the rest of the crystal, which can be 
represented by a term £ e*(r») in the hamiltonian, as in Eq. (24.29), 

i 

where r» is the coordinate of the ith. electron of the atom. Such a term 
evidently does not destroy the time-reversal invariance of the rest of 
the hamiltonian that describes the atom. Then if the number of electrons 
per atom is odd, T 2 = — 1 and there must be at least a twofold degen- 
eracy; this is called Kramers degeneracy. 1 The degeneracy is removed 
if the crystal is placed in an external magnetic field H. As we shall 
see later (Sec. 48), the magnetic effects associated with the orbital motion 
and spin of each electron cause interaction terms to appear in the hamil- 
tonian that are proportional to L • H and S • H. Equations (29.16) and 
(29.18) then show that the hamiltonian is no longer time-reversal invar- 
iant. Thus the magnetic field produces a splitting of the energy levels 
if the number of electrons per atom of the crystal is odd. It should 
be noted that this situation is not in contradiction with the assumption, 
stated just below Eq. (29.7), that T is a symmetry operation for closed 
isolated physical systems. An external magnetic field is, by definition, 
imposed from outside the system under consideration; the degeneracy is 
removed because we have assumed implicitly that the currents producing 
the field H are not reversed by T. 

REALITY OF EIGENFUNCTIONS 

Let us consider a system that has no spin or in which the spin is not 
significant. Then U = 1 and T = K in the coordinate representation. 
Further, we suppose that there is an operator 9, that commutes with K 
and that has nondegenerate eigenvalues w M : S2v„ = o&gt;„v Then Kv^ repre- 
sents the same state as w„, so that Kv^ = v* = cv^, where c is some number. 
If now we write v„ as the sum of its real and imaginary parts, v,, = w lt + iz„ 
where w M and z„ are real functions, then 

w„ — iZp = c(w M + tZf) or (1 — c)i0„ = •&amp;(!. + c)z M 

This means that iu„ and z M are multiples of each other, so that'v M is real 
except for a possible complex multiplying coefficient. In particular, all 
nondegenerate energy eigenfunctions are real in this sense if the system 
is time-reversal invariant. 

The foregoing argument can sometimes be extended to the case in 
which there is degeneracy. An interesting example is provided by a real 
hamiltonian that contains an arbitrary spherically symmetric potential, 
so that 

[#,L 2 ] = [K,H] = [K,L 2 ] = 

1 H. A. Kramers, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetenschap., Proc. 33, 959 (1930). 



234 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Eigenfunctions v Hm labeled by an energy eigenvalue E k and an orbital 
angular momentum quantum number / are still degenerate with respect 
to the magnetic quantum number m. However the operator associated 
with m, L z - —ih(d/d&lt;l&gt;), is pure imaginary and, in accordance with Eq. 
(29.16), does not commute with K. Thus we cannot argue, as was done 
in the preceding paragraph, that Kv klm = cv klm so that v Hm is real; in 
actuality it is not real in general since it is proportional to the spherical 
harmonic Yi m (6,&lt;f&gt;), which is complex for m 9* 0. 

If, however, we restrict our attention to the case m = 0, we are 
dealing only with eigenfunctions of L z that have the eigenvalue zero. 
It then follows from the relation L Z K = — KL Z that K times an eigen- 
function of L z is still an eigenfunction of L z with eigenvalue zero. Thus 
if there is no additional degeneracy, we can be sure that those eigen- 
functions v k iQ of H and L 2 that have m = are all real in the sense used 
above. These are just the eigenfunctions used in the scattering theory 
of Sees. 19 and 20. As expected, the phase shifts 8 t are real or complex 
according as the hamiltonian is or is not time-reversal invariant. 1 



30DDYNAMICAL SYMMETRY 

We have seen in Sec. 26 that symmetry and degeneracy are associated 
with each other. For example, a system that possesses space-displace- 
ment symmetry is usually degenerate with respect to the direction of the 
momentum vector p, an exception arising when p = 0. Similarly, a 
system that possesses rotational symmetry is usually degenerate with 
respect to the direction of the angular momentum vector J, that is, with 
respect to the eigenvalue of a particular component such as J z . Again, 
the case J = is exceptional. In the cases of the discrete symmetries 
of space inversion and time reversal, degeneracy is less common, since the 
transformed states are more likely to be the same as the original states. 
It was pointed out in Chap. 4 that the hydrogen atom (Sec. 16) and 
the isotropic harmonic oscillator (Prob. 12) have additional degeneracy 
beyond that associated with rotational symmetry. As remarked there, 
this is to be expected whenever the wave equation can be solved in more 
than one way, in different coordinate systems or in a single coordinate 
system oriented in different ways. From our present point of view, we 
also expect these degeneracies to be associated with some symmetry, 
which evidently is not of the geometrical type considered thus far in this 
chapter. We call such symmetries dynamical, since they arise from par- 
ticular forms of the force law. In the two relatively simple cases con- 

1 For an extension of the methods of this subsection to systems in which spin is sig- 
nificant, see R. G. Sachs, "Nuclear Theory," App. 3 (Addison- Wesley, Reading, Mass., 
1953). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 235 

sidered in this section, the existence and general nature of the dynamical 
symmetry can be inferred from the corresponding classical system, in 
much the same way as with geometrical symmetries. This is not possible 
in general; indeed, many situations of physical interest have no classical 
analogs. 

CLASSICAL KEPLER PROBLEM 

The classical hamiltonian for the Kepler problem in relative coordinates 
is 

H = f - K - (30.1) 

2/i r 

where n is the reduced mass and k is a positive quantity. For the hydro- 
gen atom, comparison with Sec. 16 shows that k = Ze 2 . A particular 
solution of the classical orbit problem is an ellipse with semimajor axis a 
that is equal to half the distance from perihelion P to aphelion A (Fig. 25), 
and with eccentricity e that is equal to (a 2 - 6 2 )V«» where b is the semi- 
minor axis. 

Since H is independent of the time, the total energy E is a constant 
of the motion. Also, since H possesses rotational symmetry, the orbital 
angular momentum L = r X p is a constant of the motion. Both of these 
statements are easily established from Eq. (24.22) and require calculation 
of some Poisson brackets. It is not difficult to show that 

E = - JL and L 2 = /x/ca(l - e 2 ) (30.2) 

2a 

L is evidently an axial vector that is perpendicular to the plane of the orbit. 
The rotational symmetry of H is enough to cause the orbit to lie in 
some plane through 0, but it is not enough to require the orbit to be closed. 
A small deviation of the potential energy from the newtonian form 
V{r) — — (ic/r) causes the major axis PA of the ellipse to precess slowly, 
so that the orbit is not closed. This suggests that there is some quantity, 
other than H and L, that is a constant of the motion and that can be used 
to characterize the orientation of the major axis in the orbital plane. We 



Fig. 25 Classical Kepler orbit with the 
center of attraction at a focus O of the 
ellipse. 




236 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

thus look for a constant vector M, which we expect to lie along the major 
axis, pointing from O to P or from to A. 

Such a vector has been known for a long time and is called the Lenz 
vector or the Runge-Lenz vector. 1 We write it in the form 

It is easily seen to be a constant of the motion, to have magnitude zee, and 
to be directed from to P. The following relations are independent of 
the particular choice of the orbital parameters a and e: 

Off 

L • M = M 2 = — L 2 + k 2 (30.4) 

HYDROGEN ATOM 

In order to treat the hydrogen atom, the foregoing quantities must be 
translated into quantum mechanics. This has already been done for r, 
p, and L. For M, we note that p x L is not equal to — L x p, so that 
Eq. (30.3) does not define a hermitian quantity. We therefore redefine 
M as a symmetric average: 

M = 2-(pxL-Lxp)-^r (30.5) 

It can then be shown from the commutation relations for r and p, after a 
considerable amount of computation, that 

[M,H] = L • M = M • L = 

These are the quantum-mechanical analogs of the constancy of M and of 
Eqs. (30.4). 

Equations (30.5) and (30.6) were used by Pauli 2 to find the energy 
levels of the hydrogen atom, independently of and simultaneously with 
Schrodinger's 3 treatment on the basis of the wave equation that was dis- 
cussed in Sec. 16. Pauli's approach is equivalent to regarding the three 
components of M as generators of some infinitesimal transformations, in 
much the same way that the three components of L were regarded in Sec. 
27 as generators of infinitesimal rotations about the three axes. We thus 
proceed by working out the algebra of the six generators L, M, which con- 
sists of 15 commutation relations. Three of these have already been 

'C Runge, "Vektoranalysis," vol. 1, p. 70 (S. Hirzel, Leipzig, 1919); W. Lenz, Z. 
Physik 24, 197 (1924). 

2 W. Pauli, Z. Physik 36, 336 (1926). 

3 E. Schrodinger, Ann. Physik 79, 361 (1926). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 237 

given in Eqs. (27.14) and are cyclic permutations of 

[L X ,L V ] = ihL, (30.7) 

Nine more are cyclic permutations of 

[M X ,L X ] = [M X ,L V ] = ihM. [M X ,L Z ] = -ihM v (30.8) 

The last three are much more difficult to calculate and are cyclic permu- 
tations of 

9-i-h 
[M X ,M V ] = --HL. (30.9) 

The L by themselves constitute the closed algebra (30.7) and, as we 
have seen in Sec. 27, generate the group 0(3). The L and M together, 
however, do not form a closed algebra since, although Eqs. (30.8) involve 
only L and M, Eq. (30.9) brings in H as well. However, since H is inde- 
pendent of the time and commutes with L and M, we can work in a sub- 
space of the Hilbert space that corresponds to a particular energy eigen- 
value E of the hamiltonian H. Then H may be replaced in Eq. (30.9) by 
E, which for bound states is a negative quantity. It is convenient now to 
replace M by 

M' - (- ^ M (30.10) 

The commutation relations (30.8) hold as well for M', and (30.9) is 
replaced by 

[M' X ,M V ] = «M* (30.11) 

THE 0(4) GROUP 

The six generators L, M' constitute a closed algebra, which can be 
identified with a known algebra in the following way. We relabel the 
coordinate vector r = (x,y,z) and the momentum vector p = (p x ,p y ,p z ) as 

r = (ri,r 2 ,r 3 ) and p = (pi,P2,Pz) 

and relabel the angular momentum vector L = (L x ,L y ,L z ) accordingly as 

L = (L2 3 ,L 3 i,Li2) 
We thus have 

La = ripj — r/pi [r if pj] = ihhn (30.12) 

where i, j = 1, 2, 3. We now extend Eqs. (30.12) to i, j = 1, 2, 3, 4 by 
inventing fourth coordinate and momentum components r A and p\ such 
that 

M' x = L lt M' = L 24 M' t = L 3i (30.13) 



23S QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It is easily verified that Eqs. (30.12) and (30.13) lead to the commutation 
relations (30.7), (30.8), and (30.11). 

The six generators L,y obviously constitute the generalization of the 
three generators L from three to four dimensions. The group that they 
generate can be shown to be the proper rotation group or orthogonal 
group in four dimensions, designated 0(4), which is the set of all 4 X 4 
real orthonormal matrices with determinant equal to + 1. This evidently 
does not represent a geometrical symmetry of the hydrogen atom, since 
the fourth components r 4 and p 4 are fictitious and cannot be identified 
with dynamical variables. For this reason, 0(4) is said to describe a 
dynamical symmetry of the hydrogen atom. It does, of course, contain 
the geometrical symmetry 0(3) as a subgroup. 

It is important to note that the 0(4) generators were obtained by 
restricting our considerations to bound states. For continuum states, E 
is positive, and the sign inside the square root of (30. 10) must be changed 
in order for M' to be hermitian. Then the sign on the right side of Eq. 
(30.11) is changed, and the identifications (30.12) and (30.13) are no 
longer valid. It turns out that the dynamical symmetry group in this 
case is isomorphic to the group of Lorentz transformations in one time and 
three space dimensions, rather than to the group of rotations in four space 
dimensions. 1 

ENERGY LEVELS OF HYDROGEN 

The energy eigenvalues can now be found with practically no further 
effort. We define two quantities 

I = i(L + M') K = i(L - M') (30.14) 

which are easily seen to satisfy the commutation relations 

[I X ,I V ] = ihl. etc. [K X ,K V ] = ihK z etc. /oft1c . 

UJU.15) 

[I,K] = [l,H] = [K,H] - 

Thus I and K each constitute an 0(3) or SU(2) algebra, and we see at once 
that the possible eigenvalues are 

P = t(t + l)h 2 K 2 = k(k + l)h 2 i, k = 0, i, 1, . . . 

(30.16) 

It is easily seen from the commutation relations (30.15) that the 0(4) 
group is of rank 2. Thus there are two Casimir operators, which may 
evidently be chosen to be 

I 2 = KL + M') 2 and K 2 = £(L - M') 2 

1 V. Fock, Z. Physik 98, 145 (1935); V. Bargmann, Z. Physik 99, 576 (1936); M. 
Bander and C. Itzykson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 330, 346 (1966). 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 239 

Alternatively, they may be chosen to be the sum and difference of I 2 
and K 2 : 

C = P + K 2 = £(L 2 + M' 2 ) and C" = P - K 2 = L • M' 

(30.17) 

The second of Eqs. (30.6) shows that C = 0, so that we are dealing 
only with that part of 0(4) for which I 2 = K 2 . Thus i = k, and the 
possible values of the first Casimir operator are 

C = 2k(k + l)h 2 k = 0, h 1, . . . (30.18) 

The third of Eqs. (30.6), together with (30.10) and (30.17), then gives 

With the expression (30.18) for C, we obtain 

IXK 

E = ~ 2ft 2 (2fc + l) 2 (3019) 

Equation (30.19) agrees with the wave equation result (16.15) if we 
remember that k = Ze 2 and make the natural identification n = 2k + 1, 
which gives n the sequence of values 1, 2, 3, . . 

It is important to note that there is no objection to using half -odd- 
integer values for i and k in (30. 16) . The only physical restriction is that 
L 2 = 1(1 + l)h 2 have only integer values of I. But, since L = I + K 
from (30.14), the triangle rule of Sec. 28 shows that I can have any value 
ranging from i-\-k = 2k = n — 1 down to \i — k\ — 0, by integer steps. 
Thus I not only is restricted to integer values but has the correct range of 
values with respect to the total quantum number n. The degeneracy of 
this energy level is also given correctly since /, and K, can each have 
2k + 1 = n independent eigenvalues, and there are therefore n 2 possible 
states altogether. 

Finally we note that, as discussed in connection with Eq. (29.5), L is 
an axial vector and does not change sign on space inversion. In similar 
fashion, it is apparent that M defined by (30.5) is a polar vector, which 
does change sign. Thus we expect that states defined by the symmetry 
generators L and M need not have well-defined parity. This is actually 
the case, since states of even and odd I are degenerate in the hydrogen 
atom. 

CLASSICAL ISOTROPIC OSCILLATOR 

The three-dimensional isotropic harmonic oscillator is described by the 
hamiltonian 

H = £k + $ Kl2 ( 30 - 20 &gt; 



240 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 




Fig. 26 Classical harmonic- 
oscillator orbit with the center 
of attraction at the center O of 
the ellipse. 



This is the generalization of the linear harmonic oscillator discussed in 
Sec. 13, for the case in which the force constant is the same in all direc- 
tions. A particular solution of the classical orbit problem is an ellipse 
with semimajor axis a and semiminor axis 6, which has its major axis 
oriented so as to make an angle 7 with the x axis (Fig. 26). As in the 
Kepler problem, H and L are constants of the motion, with values 
given by 

E = ^K{a 2 + b 2 ) and L 2 = mKa 2 b 2 

The fact that the orbit is closed again suggests that there is some 
other constant of the motion that can be used to characterize the orienta- 
tion angle 7. There is, however, a striking difference between Figs. 25 
and 26. In the Kepler problem, the center of attraction O is at a focus of 
the ellipse, whereas in the oscillator problem it is at the center. Thus the 
two directions OA and OP along the major axis are not equivalent in the 
Kepler orbit, and the minor axis is not a symmetry element. In contrast, 
both directions along the major axis and both directions along the minor 
axis are equally good symmetry elements in the oscillator orbit. Thus we 
expect that the additional constant of the motion is not a vector, as in the 
Kepler problem, but rather a quadrupole tensor. 

We define the components of the quadrupole tensor as in the last five 
of Eqs. (27.44). Computation of the appropriate Poisson brackets then 
shows that the Q's are constants if and only if we choose a and /3 such that 
a /P = m K. For the orbit shown in Fig. 26, the Q's then have the values 



Q*v = i&lt;*(a 2 - b 2 ) sin 2 7 



Qo = 



2 V3 



(a 2 + b 2 ) 



Qi = \a(a 2 - b 2 ) cos 2 7 



As expected from Fig. 26, the components of the quadrupole tensor are 
unchanged if 7 is replaced by 7 + n, and also if a and b are interchanged 
and 7 is replaced by 7 ± ?ir. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 241 

QUANTUM ISOTROPIC OSCILLATOR 

Since the quantum problem separates in cartesian coordinates, the 
solution is easily found in terms of those given in Sec. 13. The energy 
levels are 

E n = (n + f)ft ( — ) n = n x + n v + n z 

n t , n V} n z = 0, 1, 2, . . . (30.21) 

The degeneracy of E n is easily seen to be \{n + l)(n -f- 2), and the parity 
of this state is even or odd according as n is even or odd. Thus the only 
possible I values are n, n — 2, . . . down to 1 or 0, and it can be shown 
that each I occurs just once. 

Comparison with the work of Sec. 27 shows that the dynamical 
symmetry group is SUiZ). 1 Since we require that a//3 = mK, the 
Casimir operator (27.47) is related to the square of the hamiltonian 
(30.20) : 

C= -3 + 3^#' (30.22) 

Substitution of the expression (30.21) for the nth eigenvalue of H into 
(30.22) gives 

C = $(n* + 3n) 

Since SU(3) is of rank 2, there are two Casimir operators; they can be 
expressed in terms of two parameters, X and n, which take on the values 
0, 1, 2, ... . The general expression for the first Casimir operator 
(27.47) in terms of these parameters is 2 

C = £(X 2 + X M + m 2 + 3X + 3 M ) 

Thus only the representations of SU(S) with (X,m) = (n } 0) are realized by 
the isotropic oscillator. The situation here is somewhat analogous to 
that in the hydrogen atom, where only the representations of 0(4) with 
i = k are realized. 

In contrast with the hydrogen atom, we have seen that there is no 
parity mixing in the isotropic oscillator, since the I values in each degen- 
erate state are either all even or all odd. This is to be expected since all 
eight of the generators, the three components of L and the five Q's, are 
unchanged in sign on space inversion. 

The connection between the isotropic oscillator and SU(S) can also 
be made through the raising and lowering operators, a + and a, defined in 
Sec. 25. There are now three of each, one pair associated with each of 
the three coordinates. The commutation relation (25.10) and the 

1 J. M. Jauch and E. L. Hill, Phys. Rev. 67, 641 (1940). 

* Lipkin, op. cit., p. 126; his definition of C differs from that used here by a factor 4. 



242 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

hamiltonian (25.11) become 

[a i} a^] = St, and H = f Y ajoi + k) ^ Wc 

where i, y = x, y, z. Then the algebra of the nine operators ajaj is that of 
the generators of C/(3) ; linear combinations of these can be found that are 
equal to H and the eight generators of SUfi). 1 



PROBLEMS 

1. Show that Eq. (26.6) is valid, making use of the form (26.4) for U r (g) and the 
commutation relations for the components of r and p. 

2. Make use of the invariance of the scalar product of any two vectors under rota- 
tions, in order to show that the rows and columns of the rotation matrix R are respec- 
tively orthonormal to each other. Show also that the transpose of R is equal to the 
inverse of R and that the determinant of R is equal to ±1. 

3. Show that the three commutation relations (27.14) are valid, making use of the 
form (27.7) for L and the commutation relations for the components of r and p. 

4. Show that the three matrices S denned in Eqs. (27.11) satisfy the relations 
S X S = **S. Show also that S 2 = 2ft 2 . 

5. Show that the matrix elements of r for states that are rotated through the infini- 
tesimal vector &lt;|&gt; are equal to the corresponding matrix elements of Tr = r -f &lt;|&gt; X r 
for the original states. 

6. Show that the matrix elements of J for states that are rotated through the infini- 
tesimal vector 4&gt; are equal to the corresponding matrix elements of Jr = J + &lt;» X J 
for the original states. 

7. Show that the eigenvalues of S„ given in (27.11) are the same as those of J z given 
in (27.26) for j = 1. Then find the most general unitary matrix that transforms 
S, into J,. US,U^ = J,. Choose the arbitrary parameters in U so that it also trans- 
forms S x into J x and S v into J y . Into what does this U transform the vector wave 
function &lt;r a of Eq. (27.8) ? 

8. Establish Eq. (27.28) by using the definitions (27.27) and the properties of the 
spherical harmonics given in Sec. 14. 

9. Obtain an explicit expression for U R ($) = exp (— 1'4&gt; • J /ft) in the form of a 2 X 2 
matrix when J is given by Eq. (27.26) with j = £. Let the vector &lt;&gt; have the magni- 
tude $ and the polar angles and &lt;p. Show explicitly that your matrix for Vr($) is 
unitary and that it is equal to —1 when &lt;f&gt; = 2w. 

10. Show that the matrices X, (j = 1, . . . , 8) defined by Eqs. (27.37) and (27.40) 
satisfy the commutation relations (27.41) and (27.42). Then use these commutation 
relations (not the original matrix representation of the X,) to show that each X,- com- 
mutes with the Casimir operator C defined by Eq. (27.43). 

11. Show that the 28 commutators of the eight operators (27.44), computed from the 
commutation relations between the components of r and p, agree with the commu- 
tators of the X, when the identifications (27.45) and (27.46) are adopted. 

1 For fuller discussion, see J. P. Elliott, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A245, 128 (1958) ; 
Lipkin, op. cit., chap. 4. 



SYMMETRY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 243 

12. Use the methods and formulas of Sec. 28 to calculate the matrix of Clebsch- 
Gordan coefficients in the case ji = f , j 2 = ^. Compare your results with the wallet 
card. 

13. A deuteron has spin 1. Use the Wigner-Eckart theorem to find the ratios of the 
expectation values of the electric quadrupole moment operator Q(2,0) for the three 
orientations of the deuteron : m = 1,0,-1. 

14. Show that the momentum inversion operator U denned after Eq. (29.17), that 
has the property U^ a (p) = if&gt; a (— p), is unitary. 

15. Show that, if %{&lt;„' = T$ a and ^ = T^p, then (^a',^') = 0«,tfvj)* = (^/9,\M- 
From this, show that the norm of a state vector is unchanged by time reversal. 

16. Show explicitly that U = e~ irS » lh satisfies the two equations (29.19). Make use 
of the commutation properties of S u and the operators &lt;S ± = S, ±iS x . 

17. Show by direct expansion that, for s = \, e~ irS » lh = — ia v . 

18. Show by a general argument that T* = ±1. Make use of the form T = UK 
and of the fact that two successive time reversals take a state into itself so that T" 
is a multiple of the unit matrix. Do not make use of the particular form for T 
given in Eq. (29.20): 

19. A charged particle with spin operator S is assumed to possess an electric dipole 
moment operator /uS, where n is a numerical constant, so that the hamiltonian for this 
particle in any electric field E contains the interaction term — ^S • E. Show that 
neither space inversion nor time reversal is a symmetry operation for this particle 
moving in a spherically symmetric electrostatic potential &lt;t&gt;(r), even when no external 
electric field is present. 

20. Find the lowest energy eigenfunction of the hydrogen atom in the coordinate 
representation, starting from the work of Sec. 30. Proceed by finding the analog of 
Eq. (25.8) for the lowest state of the linear oscillator; then solve it in analogy with 
Eq. (25.14). 



8 
Approximation Methods 
for Bound States 



In quantum mechanics, as in classical mechanics, there are relatively few 
systems of physical interest for which the equations of motion can be 
solved exactly. Approximation methods are therefore expected to play 
an important part in virtually all applications of the theory. This 
enhances rather than diminishes the importance of those problems for 
which exact solutions can be found since, as was pointed out at the begin- 
ning of Chaps. 4 and 5, exact solutions are often useful as starting points 
for approximate calculations. They may also help to establish limits of 
validity for various approximation methods. 

In this chapter and the next we develop several approximation 
methods and apply them to illustrative problems. It is convenient to 
divide the methods into two groups according as they deal with bound 
states (considered in this chapter) or with scattering states (considered in 
Chap. 9). 



244 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 245 

31DSTATIONARY PERTURBATION THEORY 

The stationary perturbation theory 1 is concerned with finding the changes 
in the discrete energy levels and eigenfunctions of a system when a small 
disturbance is applied. It is assumed from the outset that the hamilton- 
ian H in the Schrodinger wave equation can be written as the sum of two 
parts. One of these parts, H , is of sufficiently simple structure that its 
Schrodinger equation can be solved, and the other part H ' is small enough 
so that it can be regarded as a perturbation on H . It is convenient to 
retain our old symbols u k and E k for the supposedly known orthonormal 
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the unperturbed hamiltonian H and to 
use \p and W for the perturbed stationary wave function and energy level: 

H+ =W* H = H + H' H u k = E k u k (31.1) 

NONDEGENERATE CASE 

The assumption that H' is small suggests that we expand the perturbed 
eigenfunction and eigenvalue as power series in H' . This is most con- 
veniently accomplished in terms of a parameter X, such that the zero, first, 
etc., powers of X correspond to the zero, first, etc., orders of the perturba- 
tion calculation. We replace H' by \H' and express \f/ and W as power 
series in X. We assume that these two series are continuous analytic 
functions of X for X between zero and one, although the results obtained 
often have the usefulness of an asymptotic series even when this is not the 
case. The different orders of the perturbation approximation are then 
given by the coefficients of corresponding powers of X. In the final 
results, X is set equal to 1. 

The perturbed wave function and energy level are written 

* = *o + x*i +.xv. + xVt + • • • , 31 2) 

W = Wo + XTTi + \ 2 W 2 + \*W» + • • • 

and are substituted into the wave equation to give 

(Ho + XH'K+o + X*i + • • ■) 

= (Wo + XTFx + • • -)(*o + X*i + • • •) (31.3) 

Since Eq. (31.3) is supposed to be valid for a continuous range of X, we can 
equate the coefficients of equal powers of X on both sides to obtain a series 
of equations that represent successively higher orders of the perturbation. 

(Ho - Wo)*o = 
(Ho - Wo)+i = (W x - ff')*o 
(Ho - W )*2 = (Wi - ff')*i + W 2 H 
(Ho - Wo)** = (Wy - H')4&gt;2 + W^ + W z *o etc. 

1 E. Schrodinger, Ann. Physik 80, 437 (1926). 



246 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The first of Eqs. (31.4) means that \f? is any one of the unperturbed 
eigenfunctions, as expected. We therefore put 

&lt;Ao = Um W = E m (31.5) 

This state u m is discrete, since we are dealing with the perturbation of a 
bound state. It is assumed to be nondegenerate as well, although others 
of the unperturbed eigenfunctions may be degenerate or continuously 
distributed in energy. The case in which the unperturbed state ^ is 
degenerate is considered later in this section. 

Two general comments can be made in regard to Eqs. (31.4). * First, 
any of the functions \f/ a can have an arbitrary multiple of if/ added to it 
without affecting the value of the left side and hence without otherwise 
affecting the determination of \(/, in terms of lower-order functions. We 
choose this arbitrary multiple in such a way that 

(*o,*.) =0 s &gt; (31.6) 

Second, the inner product of ^o and the left side of each of Eqs. (31.4) is 
seen to be zero when use is made of (23.21) or (23.28). Thus the inner 
product of ^o and the right side is zero in each case, and it follows with 
the help of Eqs. (31.5) and (31.6) that 

W, = ^'fT = (««&gt;ffV.-i) * &gt; (31.7) 

We see that the calculation of W to a given order in H ' requires knowledge 
of \f/ only to the next lower order. 2 

FIRST-ORDER PERTURBATION 

Equation (31.7) with s = 1 shows that 

W x = (u^H'Un) = &lt;m|#'|m&gt; (31.8) 

which is the expectation value of H' for the unperturbed state m. 

It is convenient to calculate ^i by expanding it in terms of the w„: 

*1 = Sndn^Un (31.9) 

where S, denned at the beginning of Sec. 23, denotes a summation over the 
discrete set together with an integration over the continuous set of eigen- 
functions. Substitution of (31.9) into the second of Eqs. (31.4) gives 

S»o»»&gt;(Ho - E n )u n = (W l - H')^ 

1 P.-O. Lowdin, /. Math. Phys., 6, 1341 (1965). 

2 It can also be shown from Eqs. (31.4) and (31.6) that knowledge of all the \f/'s up to 
t, is sufficient to determine all the W's up to Wu+i- P.-O. Lowdin, /. Molec. Spectr. 
13, 326 (1964); see also Prob. 14. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 247 

where flu (1) = because of (31.6). We replace H u n by E n u n , multiply by 
u*, and integrate over all space, making use of the orthonormality of 
the w's: 

a,»&gt; = ^M iM . (31.10) 

■Urn ~ &amp;k 
SECOND-ORDER PERTURBATION 

Equation (31.7) with s = 2, together with Eqs. (31.9) and (31.10), gives 
w C' (»/ \w\ \ V (m\H'\n)(n\H'\m) 

_S;lgM (8i.il) 

where the prime on S' n denotes the omission of the term n = m from the 
summation and integration over n. The last step in (31.11) follows since 
it is assumed that H ' is hermitian. 

We calculate ^2 by again expanding in terms of the u n : 

H = S&gt;„ (2) w» a„.&lt;» = (3L12) 

and substituting into the third of Eqs. (31.4) to obtain 

S&gt;„ (2) (H - E m )u n = SWHWi - H')u n + W iUn 
As before, we replace H u n by E n u n , multiply by u*, and integrate: 

a k ™(E k - E n ) = a^W, - S' n a n ^(k\H'\n) k*m 

This gives, with the help of (31.8) and (31.10), 

_ Q/ (k\H'\n)(n\H'\m) _ (k\H'\m)(m\H'\m) 
a " ~ *" (E m - E k )(E m - E n ) (E m ~E„y (dl * W; 

Equations (31.2) and (31.8) to (31.13), with X = 1, give the energy 
and wave function to second order in H' : 

w = e. + WW + s: { p^ 

f&lt;4ffVy/ (m\H'\m) \ 

^^^ s ^[e-^eX 1 -^^eI) 

(k\H'\n)(n\H'\m) 1 
^^ n (E m -E k )(E m -E n )\ {6L - lV 

The primes again denote omission of k = m or n = m, as the case may be. 



248 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It is important to note that this \p is not normalized, since 



(E m - E k y 



to second order in H'. This occurred because of the arbitrary imposition 
of the condition (31.6). Other choices for (^ ,&amp;) would lead to expres- 
sions for yf/ that differ from (31.14) only by a multiplicative complex 
number; they would not affect the expression for W. 

PERTURBATION OF AN OSCILLATOR 

As a simple example of the application of the first- and second-order 
perturbation theory to a nondegenerate state, we consider the perturba- 
tion of the rath energy level of the linear harmonic oscillator of Sees. 13 
and 25 by an additional energy H ' = %bx 2 . The unperturbed hamiltonian 
is Ho = p 2 /2n + ?Kx 2 (the mass is denoted by jz to avoid confusion with 
the quantum number ra); the unperturbed eigenf unctions u m (x) given by 
Eq. (13.13) correspond to the eigenvalues E m = (ra + \)h(K/n)*, where 
ra = 0, 1, 2, . . . . This example is evidently a trivial one since the 
perturbed eigenfunctions and eigenvalues are given simply by replacing 
K by K + b in Um(x) and E m ; it is nevertheless instructive. 

We require the matrix elements of x 2 between various pairs of 
harmonic-oscillator wave functions. They may be obtained with the help 
of the generating function (13.10) for the Hermite polynomials, as in 
Prob. 3 of Chap. 4, or more simply by matrix multiplication using the 
definition (22.3) and the expressions for (n|x|ra) given in Eq. (13.18) or in 
Eqs. (25.12) and (25.13). We readily obtain 

/ (2a 2 )-»[(ra + l)(ra + 2)]* n = ra + 2 

/ I 21 \ _ ) (2a 2 )- x (2ra +1) n = m 

{n\x \m) - j (2a2) _ 1[m(m _ 1}] i n = ra - 2 

\ otherwise 

where a = (nK/h 2 )*. Substitution into the first of Eqs. (31.14) then 
gives for the energy to second order 



W = (ra + £ 



KfyKv*) 



in agreement with the expansion of (w + ?)h[(K + 6)/m] j to second order 
in b. 

DEGENERATE CASE 

The discussion thus far has assumed that the initial state \f/ = u m is non- 
degenerate, although others of the unperturbed eigenfunctions may be 
degenerate. Suppose now that there are two states, u m and ui, that have 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 249 

the same unperturbed energy. Then Eq. (31.10) causes difficulty when 
k = I unless it happens that (l\H'\m) = 0. We consider first the case in 
which (l\H'\m) ?* 0, so that the results obtained above cannot be valid. 

The initial state is not specified by its unperturbed energy; the state 
may be Um or m or any linear combination of them. Let us suppose that 
the perturbation H' removes the degeneracy in some order, so that for 
finite X there are two states that have different energies. We assumed 
earlier that \f/ and W are continuous analytic functions of X as X — &gt; 0; thus 
each of the two states approaches a definite linear combination of u m and 
Ui when X = 0. If we happen to choose one of these two linear combina- 
tions as the initial state, the perturbation expansion can be carried 
through without difficulty. If, however, we start with any other linear 
combination, there is a discontinuous change at X = 0, so that the expan- 
sions (31.2) are not valid there and the method developed above breaks 
down. Out of the infinite number of orthonormal pairs of linear com- 
binations of u m and u t , the particular pair that we require will depend on 
H'. For example, if H' is the perturbation produced by an external 
electric or magnetic field, the pair we want will depend not only on which 
kind of field is present but also on its direction. 

In order to find this pair, we write in place of Eq. (31.5) 

^o = a m u m + aiui Wo = E m = Ei 

We then substitute this ^o into the right side of the second of Eqs. (31.4) 
and take the inner product of this equation successively with u m and ui : 

((m\H'\m) - W x )a m + &lt;ro|H'|Z)a, = ni 1«»V 

(l\H'\m)a m + ((l\H'\l) - W{)a t = K * 1 ' ° } 

These homogeneous algebraic equations can be solved for a m and a t if and 
only if the determinant of their coefficients vanishes. We thus obtain a 
secular equation of just the type encountered in connection with Eq. 
(22.21); in the present situation it is a quadratic equation for W\. The 
two solutions of this equation are 

W x = U(m\H'\m) + (l\H'\l)) 

± U((m\H'\m) - (l\H'\l)y + 4|(m|tf'|Z&gt;|*]i (31.16) 

Since the diagonal matrix elements of the hermitian operator H' are real, 
both values of W\ are real. They are equal if and only if 

{m\H'\m) = {l\H'\l) and (m\H'\l) = (31.17) 

In this case we say that the degeneracy is not removed in first order; then 

a m and a* evidently cannot be determined from the first-order calculation. 

On the other hand, if either or both of Eqs. (31.17) are not satisfied, 

the two values of W\ calculated from (31.16) are distinct, and each can be 



250 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

used in turn to calculate a m and a* from Eqs. (31.15). We thus obtain the 
desired pair of linear combinations of the unperturbed states u m and ui. 
Next we take the inner product of u k with the second of Eqs. (31.4), where 
k t* m, I, and make use of (31.9) to obtain 

a k v(E k - E m ) = - (k\H'\m)a m - (k\H'\l) ai (31.18) 

This gives a k (1) for k =^ m, I, and Eq. (31.6) with s = 1 is satisfied if we 
assume that a m (1) = ai (1) = 0. The calculation can then be carried to 
higher order just as in the nondegenerate situation considered earlier. 

REMOVAL OF DEGENERACY IN SECOND ORDER 1 

If the two values of W x obtained in the preceding subsection are the same, 
we must go to second order in order to remove the degeneracy. The inner 
product of the third of Eqs. (31.4) with u m and ui yields 

S' n (m\H'\n)a n w - W 2 a m = S' n (l\H'\n)a n ™ - W 2 a t = 

(31.19) 

The prime on S' n now denotes the omission of both of the terms n = m and 
n = I from the summation and integration over n, since we again assume 
on the basis of Eq. (31.6) that a m (1) = a t ^ = 0. Substitution of a„ (1) 
from (31.18) into (31.19) gives a pair of homogeneous algebraic equations 
for a m and ai : 



/., \(m\H'\n)\* w \'r, (m\H'\n)(n\H'\l) 

V S » E -E ~ Wi ) Um + S " E -E ai = ° 

c/ {l\H'\n){n\H'\m) , ( c , WP'W w \ 



(31.20) 



The secular equation associated with Eqs. (31.20) yields solutions 
for W 2 that are of the same general form as (31.16). The analogs of Eqs. 
(31.17) are 

\(m\H'\n)\* = -, \(l\H'\n)\* 
° n E — E E — E 

and Sffl^-O (31.21) 

Unless both of these equations are satisfied, the degeneracy is removed in 
second order. 

The close analogy between the sums that appear in Eqs. (31.20) and 
(31.21) and the matrix elements that appear in Eqs. (31.15) and (31.17) 
leads to the former often being referred to as second-order matrix elements. 

1 J. H. Van Vleck, Phys. Rev. 33, 467 (1929), Sec. 4. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 251 

A necessary and sufficient condition that degeneracy is removed in any 
given order is then either that the diagonal matrix elements of H' for the 
two degenerate unperturbed states are unequal [so that the first of Eqs. 
(31.17) or (31.21) is not valid] or that the off-diagonal matrix element of 
H' between these states fails to vanish [so that the second of Eqs. (31.17) 
or (31.21) is not valid]. 

So far as the latter situation is concerned, a sufficient condition that 
the degeneracy is removed in first order is that the perturbation H' con- 
nects the initial degenerate states u m and ui in first order, so that (m\H'\l) 
fails to vanish. Similarly, the degeneracy is removed in second order if 
the perturbation connects the initial states in second order, so that there 
are one or more other states u n such that (m\H'\n) and (l\H'\n) both fail 
to vanish. 

It is not difficult to show that all the foregoing work can be general- 
ized to the removal of degeneracy in higher order and also to the case in 
which the initial state is more than doubly degenerate. 

ZEEMAN EFFECT WITHOUT ELECTRON SPIN 

The change in the energy levels of an atom caused by a uniform external 
magnetic field is called the Zeeman effect. We now consider the change 
of first order in the field strength H for a hydrogen atom. For simplicity, 
the interaction between the magnetic moment associated with the electron 
spin and the magnetic field will be neglected, although in actuality it is 
of the same order of magnitude as the term we calculate. The effect of 
electron spin will be included in Sec. 48. 

A constant magnetic field can be represented by the vector potential 

A=£Hxr (31.22) 

since H = V X A. The divergence of (31.22) is zero, so that the terms 
involving A that appear in the hamiltonian (24.39) for an electron of 
charge — e and reduced mass ix are 

-^ A - V + 2^ A! = 27 C (HXl &gt;-» + 8^&lt; H * rMH&gt;&lt;r &gt; 

= 27c H - L + 8^ H,r,8in '' (3L23) 

where L = r x p, 6 is the angle between r and H, and e is a positive 
quantity. Since we wish to work only to first order in H, we can put 

IF-^jH-L (31.24) 

The energy eigenfunctions of the unperturbed hydrogen atom are 
usually chosen to be eigenstates of L t , with eigenvalues mh, where m is 



252 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

the magnetic quantum number introduced in Sec. 14. However, this is 
a sensible choice only if the magnetic field is in the z direction, since then 
Eq. (31.8) becomes 

Wr = (m\H'\m) = ^ Hmh (31.25) 

and the degeneracy of the 21 + 1 states of given n and I is removed in 
first order. On the other hand, if the magnetic field is not in the z direc- 
tion, the states labeled by m are not a suitable starting point for the 
degenerate-perturbation calculation. This provides an example of the 
remark at the end of the paragraph above Eqs. (31.15) that the unper- 
turbed initial states must be chosen with the direction of the perturbing 
field in mind. 

FIRST-ORDER STARK EFFECT IN HYDROGEN 

The change in the energy levels of an atom caused by a uniform external 
electric field of strength E is called the Stark effect. Calculation of the 
change of first order in E in the case of a hydrogen atom is somewhat 
more complicated than for a magnetic field. It is still desirable to choose 
the unperturbed initial states with the direction of the perturbing field 
in mind; as before, we take the z axis along the field and use eigenstates 
of L z . However, there is now an additional complication from the fact 
that H', given by Eq. (31.26) below, is odd with respect to space inversion, 
so that the expectation value of H' is zero for all states that have definite 
parities. 

The perturbation H' is now the extra energy of the nucleus and 
electron in the external field and is readily shown to be 

H' = eEz = e£r cos (31.26) 

where the polar axis and E are in the direction of positive z and e is again 
a positive quantity. The discussion of Sec. 14 showed that wave func- 
tions for any spherically symmetric potential energy, when expressed in 
spherical harmonics, have even or odd parity according as the azimuthal 
quantum number I is even or odd. Since the perturbation (31.26) is odd 
with respect to inversion, the only matrix elements of H' that fail to 
vanish are those for unperturbed states that have opposite parities. 
This shows that a nondegenerate state, such as the ground state (n = 1) 
of hydrogen which has even parity, has no first-order Stark effect. 

The first excited state (n = 2) of hydrogen is fourfold degenerate; 
the quantum numbers I, m have the values (0,0), (1,0), (1,1), and (1, — 1). 
We now show quite generally that nonvanishing off-diagonal matrix ele- 
ments of H ' exist only for states that have the same quantum number m. 
It is apparent from Eqs. (24.31) that z commutes with the z component 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 253 

of the orbital angular momentum L z = xp y — yp x , so that [L Z ,H'] = 0. 
The matrix element of this equation between states j and fcina repre- 
sentation in which L t is diagonal is (mj — mk)h{j\H'\k) =0, so that 
(j\H'\k) = unless m, = m k . Thus all 16 matrix elements of H' between 
the four degenerate unperturbed states given above are zero except for 
the off-diagonal elements between the first two (opposite parity) states. 

PERTURBED ENERGY LEVELS 

An extension of the discussion that led to Eq. (31.15) shows that the 
secular equation for the first-order Stark effect of the n = 2 state of 
hydrogen is 



(31.27) 



-Wi 


&lt;0,0|tf'|l,0&gt; 








&lt;l,0|tf'|0,0&gt; 


-Wi 














-w 1 














-w t 



The nonvanishing matrix elements of H' are 

&lt;1,0|#'|0,0&gt; = &lt;0,0|#'|1,0&gt;* = eE/w* 10 (r)r cos 6 w 200 (r) d 3 r 
eE 



L°° /_i ri ( 2 ) e~ r/a »w 2 dw dr 



16a&lt;&gt; 
= — 3eEao 

The four roots of Eq. (31.27) are 0, 0, 3eEa , and — 3eEa , so that 
half of the fourfold degeneracy is removed in first order. It is easily 
seen that the first two values of W\ correspond to any two linearly inde- 
pendent combinations of w 2 u and W2,i,-i and that the third and fourth 
values correspond to 2 -i (w 2 oo — W210) and 2 - *(w 2 oo + w 2 io), respectively. 
This means that a hydrogen atom in its first excited state behaves as 
though it has a permanent electric dipole moment of magnitude 3ea that 
can be oriented in three different ways : one state parallel to the external 
field, one state antiparallel to the field, and two states with zero com- 
ponent along the field. 

OCCURRENCE OF PERMANENT ELECTRIC OIPOLE MOMENTS 

It follows from the foregoing discussion that an atom can have a per- 
manent electric dipole moment (energy change proportional to E) only 
when its unperturbed state is nondegenerate and does not have well- 
defined parity or is degenerate and contains components of opposite 
parities. On the other hand, any atom can have an induced electric 
dipole moment. This means that the dipole moment is proportional to 
E or that the energy of the atom in the external electric field is propor- 



254 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

tional to E 2 . In accordance with Eq. (31.11), a second-order perturbation 
energy of this type is expected for any system. 

The discussion of Sec. 29 shows that if the unitary space-inversion 
operator Ui commutes with the hamiltonian for any system, the energy 
eigenstates can be chosen to have well-defined parities. With the excep- 
tion of the weak interactions, which among other things are responsible 
for radioactive beta decay, all known hamiltonians commute with Ui. 
Then it is expected that an atom or nucleus in its ground state will at 
most possess an extremely small permanent electric dipole moment 
(&lt;eX 10 -20 cm) that might arise from the weak interactions. Thus 
far, none has been found experimentally. 

It is also possible, as in the case of the hydrogen atom, that unper- 
turbed degenerate states of opposite parities can give rise to a per- 
manent electric dipole moment. However, this occurs only in hydrogen 
because of a special dynamical symmetry (see Sec. 30) and even there 
does not occur for the ground state. Such degeneracy could also occur 
accidentally but is then very improbable on statistical grounds. In 
some molecules, however, there is a group of nearly degenerate rotational 
states of both parities. If these energy levels are closely spaced in com- 
parison either with the thermal energy of the molecule or with the energy 
associated with the applied electric field, they can give rise to a permanent 
electric dipole moment. 1 In this case the direction of the dipole is related 
to a figure axis of the molecule; the dipole would, for example, be along 
the line joining the two atoms in an unsymmetrical molecule such as 
hydrogen chloride. 

In the systems considered thus far, the electric dipole moment is 
either along the applied electric field (hydrogen atom in an excited state) 
or along a molecular figure axis (hydrogen chloride). For an elementary 
particle or a nucleus, it is reasonable to assume that the ground state is 
nondegenerate and that the only figure axis is that defined by the spin 
operator S. Then the electric dipole moment operator must be propor- 
tional to S. This means that, for such a particle moving in a static, 
spherically symmetric electrostatic potential 4&gt;(r), the hamiltonian con- 
tains a term of the form /zS • V&lt;f&gt;, where n is a numerical constant. Thus 
even in this environment neither space inversion nor time reversal is a 
symmetry operation (see Prob. 19, Chap. 7). An extension of this argu- 
ment shows that although a particle or nucleus may possess an electric 
charge, magnetic dipole moment, electric quadrupole moment, etc., it 
cannot possess a magnetic monopole, electric dipole moment, magnetic 
quadrupole moment, etc., if either or both of space inversion and time 
reversal are symmetry operations. This supplements the remark at 

1 J. H. Van Vleck, "The Theory of Electric and Magnetic Susceptibilities," p. 154 
(footnote 28), sec. 48, (Oxford, New York, 1932). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 255 

the end of Sec. 28 which relates allowed multipole moments to the total 
angular momentum quantum number. 

32DTHE VARIATION METHOD 

The variation method can be used for the approximate determination of 
the lowest or ground-state energy level of a system when there is no 
closely related problem that is capable of exact solution, so that the per- 
turbation method is inapplicable. It can also be applied to systems 
that are described by a nonseparable Schrodinger equation, in which 
case numerical solutions are extremely arduous and the WKB method 
(Sec. 34) cannot be used. 

EXPECTATION VALUE OF THE ENERGY 

It was shown in Sec. 10 that, if an arbitrary normalized function ip is 
expanded in energy eigenfunctions 

^ = V A b ue where Hub = Eue (32.1) 

E 

and the ub form a complete orthonormal set, the expectation value of H 
for the function 4&gt; is given by 

(H) = f+*H+ dr = J E\A B \ 2 (32.2) 

E 

where the integration is extended over the entire range of all the coordi- 
nates of the system. It is assumed for convenience in Eqs. (32.1) and 

(32.2) that the energy eigenvalues are all discrete; this can be accom- 
plished by enclosing the system in a box (Sec. 10), or the summation can 
be replaced by the symbol S (Sec. 23). 

A useful inequality can be derived from Eq. (32.2) by replacing 
each eigenvalue E in the summation on the right side by the lowest 
eigenvalue E : 

(H) &gt; I E \Ab\ 2 = E l \A E \&gt; (32.3) 

E E 

Since V \Ab\ z = 1 for a normalized function yp, as was shown in Sec. 10, 

E 

(32.3) yields the inequality 

Eo &lt; tt*H* dr (32.4) 

In the event that \p is not normalized, (32.4) evidently can be rewritten 
as 

° ~ IWdT ( } 



256 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The variation method 1 consists in evaluating the integrals on the 
right side of (32.4) or (32.5) with a trial function \f/ that depends on a 
number of parameters and varying these parameters until the expectation 
value of the energy is a minimum. The result is an upper limit for the 
ground-state energy of the system, which is likely to be close if the 
form of the trial function resembles that of the eigenf unction (see Prob. 5). 
Thus it is important to make use of any available information or physical 
intuition in choosing the trial function. 2 

APPLICATION TO EXCITED STATES 

The variation method can also be used to obtain an upper limit for one 
of the higher energy levels if the trial function is orthogonal to the eigen- 
functions of all the lower states. Suppose that the energy levels are 
arranged in an ascending series: E , Ei, E 2 , .... Then, if \(/ is orthog- 
onal to UEi for i = 0, 1, . . . , n, it is easily seen from (32.1) that the 
corresponding expansion coefficients A Ei are all zero. An inequality can 
be derived from (32.2) by replacing each eigenvalue E in the summation 
on the right by E n+ i, with the result that the expectation value of the 
energy is an upper limit on this eigenvalue. 

The trial function \f/ — ueJu e $ dr is evidently orthogonal to u E&lt;&gt; so 
that, if the lowest eigenfunction is known either from an exact solution or 
to a sufficiently good approximation from a variation calculation, an 
upper limit for the energy of the first excited state can be computed. 
Trial functions that are orthogonal to any number of known eigenfunc- 
tions are easily found in this way. 

It is sometimes possible to divide the energy eigenfunctions into 
groups such that any member of one group is orthogonal to any member 
of any other group. Suppose that there is a hermitian operator F that 
commutes with H (FH — HF = 0) ; then, from a theorem of Sec. 22, F 
and H can be diagonalized simultaneously and have common eigenfunc- 
tions. Now any two eigenfunctions of F that correspond to different 
eigenvalues are orthogonal to each other. 3 Thus a trial function that is 
constructed entirely from eigenfunctions of F that correspond to a given 
eigenvalue is orthogonal to all other eigenfunctions that correspond to 

1 The method was originally applied by Lord Rayleigh in 1873 to the computation of 
the vibration frequencies of mechanical systems: "Theory of Sound," 2d rev. ed., vol. 
1, sec. 88 (Macmillan, London, 1937; reprinted by Dover, New York). See also 
W. Ritz, J. Reine Angew. Math. 136, 1 (1908); P. M. Morse and H. Feshbach, "Meth- 
ods of Theoretical Physics," sec. 9.4 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1953). 

2 For an extension of this method that brackets several of the lowest eigenvalues, see 
J. K. L. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. 43, 830 (1933). Lower bounds have been studied by 
P.-O. Lowdin, Phys. Rev. 139, A357 (1965), who also gives references to earlier work. 
8 This is shown explicitly in Eq. (10.4) for the energy operator, and the proof given 
there is easily extended to any hermitian operator. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 257 

different eigenvalues of F, and will provide an upper limit for the lowest 
energy eigenvalue that is associated with this eigenvalue of F. The fore- 
going results are useful when the operator F is one whose eigenfunctions 
are easily recognizable by some simple property, such as, for example, the 
symmetry in case F is the angular momentum or the parity. Then a 
trial function with angular dependence corresponding to a particular 
angular momentum, or with a particular parity, can easily be written 
and gives an upper limit for the lowest energy level that has this angular 
momentum or parity. 

GROUND STATE OF HELIUM 

As a first example, we use the variation method with a simple trial func- 
tion to obtain an upper limit for the energy of the ground state of 
the helium atom. The helium atom consists of a nucleus of charge +2e 
surrounded by two electrons; from Eq. (16.1) we find that its hamiltonian 
is (neglecting the motion of the nucleus) 



2^ V ' 



where ri and r 2 are the position vectors of the two electrons with respect 
to the nucleus as origin, and r u = |fi — r 2 | is the distance between the 
two electrons. 

If the interaction energy e 2 / r i2 between the two electrons were not 
present, the ground-state eigenfunction of H would be the product of 
two normalized hydrogenic wave functions Wioo(ri)«ioo(r2) given in Eq. 
(16.24): 

*(ri,r 2 ) = JZL-e-w-KT™ (32.7) 

irflo 

with Z = 2. We shall use (32.7) as a trial function and permit Z to be 
the variation parameter so that it is not necessarily equal to 2. 

It follows from Prob. 13, Chap. 4, that the expectation values of the 
kinetic and potential energies for the ground state of a hydrogen atom are 
e 2 /2oo and ~e 2 /a , respectively; the corresponding hydrogen wave func- 
tion is (7rao 3 ) -i e~ r '°o. The expectation value of either of the kinetic- 
energy operators in (32.6) for the function (32.7) is obtained most easily 
by noting that operation with the laplacian gives a result that is inversely 
proportional to the square of the length scale of the wave function; since 
the scale of (32.7) is smaller than that of the hydrogen wave function by a 
factor of Z, the expectation value of each of the kinetic-energy operators 
is e 2 Z 2 /2a . Similarly, the factors 1/r make the expectation values of the 
nuclear potential-energy operators inversely proportional to the length 
scale; there is also an additional factor 2 from the nuclear charge, so that 
each one is — 2e*Z/a . 



258 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

ELECTRON INTERACTION ENERGY 

The expectation value of the interaction energy between the electrons is 

//^*(ri J rO^^(ri,r,)ci«r 1 d«r 1 . 

=■ (^ j e2 // j- e-( 2Z '««Hn+r,) d 3 n d 3 r % (32.8) 

This integral is most easily evaluated by regarding it as the mutual 
electrostatic energy of two overlapping, spherically symmetric, charge 
distributions, in which case simplifications from the theory of electro- 
statics can be introduced. 

A more general way of performing the integration, which can also 
be used for wave functions that are not spherically symmetric, consists 
in expanding l/ri 2 in spherical harmonics. 

^ 2 - r 7. (?) ^(«&gt;s e) n &gt; r* 



ri t 4r W 

J- = lYAlY Pj( cos*) 
r» n£ W 



(32.9) 
n &lt; r 2 



where 6 is the angle between ri and r 2 , cos 9 = cos 0i cos Q% -+- sin dv 
sin d 2 cos (&lt;£i — &lt;f} 2 ), and 0i, 4&gt;i and 2 , &lt;f&gt; 2 are the polar angles of the vectors 
ri and r 2 , respectively. 1 It can be shown 2 that 

Pj(cos 6) = Pi (cos 0i)Pj(cos d 2 ) 

+ 2 V ^Z-^Jp,™(cos 0i)P,«(cos 2 ) cos m(0x - &lt;j&gt; 2 ) (32.10) 

When (32.9) and (32.10) are substituted into (32.8) and use is made 
of the orthogonality of the spherical harmonics, the integration over the 
polar angles of ri causes all terms to vanish except that for which I and 
m are zero. The integral on the right side of (32.8) becomes 

(47r) 2 [*( I'' - e -(2^/a.)(n+r,) r2 2 &lt;fr 2 _|_ /"" 1 g-(JZ/« i )&lt;r 1 +r*&gt; ri » fr \ ^2 fo 

Jo \Jo n jr\ r 2 J 

which can be evaluated as 57r 2 a 5 /8Z 5 . Thus the electron interaction 
energy has the expectation value 5c 2 Z/8o . 

1 Equations (32.9) follow at once from the generating function (14.10) for the Legendre 
polynomials; the expression for cos 6 is simply obtained from the scalar product of 
the vectors ri and t t in rectangular coordinates. 

2 E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson, "A Course of Modern Analysis," 4th ed., p. 328 
(Cambridge, London, 1935). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES M» 

VARIATION OF THE PARAMETER Z 

We now have the result that the expectation value of the hamiltonian 
(32.6) for the trial function (32.7) is 

Differentiation with respect to Z shows that this is a minimum when 
Z - f£ = 1.69. Thus the lowest upper limit for the ground-state energy 
of the helium atom obtainable with this trial function is 

-(«)«- = -2.85- 

The experimental value for the minimum energy required to remove both 
electrons from a helium atom is 2.904e 2 /ao, so that our limit is about 1.9 
percent high. The most careful variation calculation of the ground-state 
energy of helium gives a result in excellent agreement with experiment 1 
and provides an important verification of the theory of quantum 
mechanics. 

The result that hydrogenic wave functions give the best energy 
value when Z = H rather than 2 indicates that each electron screens 
the nucleus from the other electron, the effective nuclear charge being 
reduced by x\ of an electronic charge. 

If the electron interaction term e 2 /ri 2 is regarded as a perturbation, 
the first-order perturbation energy is given by (H) with Z = 2 and is 
— 2.75e 2 /a , which is 5.3 percent above the experimental value. It is 
apparent that, in general, the first-order perturbation calculation is 
equivalent to a nonoptimal variation calculation. 

VAN DER WAALS INTERACTION 

As our second example of the application of the variation method, we 
calculate the van der Waals (long-range) interaction between two hydro- 
gen atoms in their ground states. It is convenient to consider this prob- 
lem first by means of the perturbation theory, since it is then easier to 
see that the leading term in the energy at great separation distances varies 
inversely as the sixth power of this distance. Also, it turns out that the 
perturbation theory and the variation method provide opposite limits for 
the coefficient of this term. 

We assume that the nuclei of the two hydrogen atoms, A and B, are 
fixed in space a distance R apart and that the z axis is chosen parallel to 
the line through A and B. Then if r x is the vector displacement of elec- 
tron 1 from nucleus A and r 2 is the vector displacement of electron 2 

1 E. A. Hylleraas, Z. Physik 65, 209 (1930). J. Sucher and H. M. Foley, Phys. Rev. 
96, 966 (1954), discuss a number of corrections and give references to more recent work. 



2«&gt; QUANTUM MECHANICS 



A R B 

Fig. 27 Two hydrogen atoms, with nuclei at A and B separated by a distance 
B, have electrons at 1 and 2; their interaction is given by H' in Eq. (32.11). 

from nucleus B (see Fig. 27), the hamiltonian for the two electrons can 
be written 

H = Ho + H' # 

Ho = - *1 (v x « + V 2 &gt;) - * - e - 

rr, _ e? , e 2 f^ e*_ 

# f"i2 T\b r 2A 

The unperturbed hamiltonian H has the solution 
t*o(ri,r 2 ) = wioo(ri)wioo(r2) 

for two noninteracting hydrogen atoms in their ground states. We 
regard the interaction terms H' as a perturbation; this is equivalent to 
assuming that R &gt;&gt;&gt; a . 

Since we are interested in the leading term in the interaction energy 
when R is large, we expand H' in powers of 1/R and keep the lowest 
terms. 

H' = ^{l + |H- 2(22_2:i) 



-SH 

] 



R 

(x, - xQ' + (y, - »i)» + (z, - zi)'1~l 



+ B 

e 2 
w ^- 3 (x^ + ym — 2ziz 2 ) (32.12) 

The last term is the interaction energy of two electric dipoles that corre- 
spond to the instantaneous configurations of the two atoms. 1 

It is apparent at once that the expectation value of the leading 

1 The neglected terms in the expansion (32.12) that vary like 1//J* are the dipole- 
quadrupole interaction; the 1/R* terms are the quadrupole-quadrupole interaction, 
etc. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 261 

term in H' for the state i*o(ri,r») is zero, since u is an even function 
of ri and r 2 and H' is an odd function of ri and r 2 separately. It can 
also be shown that all the neglected higher terms in H' have zero expecta- 
tion value for u , since these terms can be expressed as spherical harmonics 
of order different from zero. Thus the leading term in the interaction 
energy is the second-order perturbation of the dipole-dipole term, which 
is proportional to B n and hence varies like 1/R*. 1 

PERTURBATION CALCULATION 

From Eq. (31.11), the second-order change in the energy of the two 
hydrogen atoms is 

. W(m -ZW*3f (32.13) 

£jQ — £j n 

where the index n refers to all states of the pair of unperturbed hydrogen 
atoms (including dissociated states), and the ground state w is excluded 
from the generalized summation. It is apparent that W(R) is negative, 
since E &lt; E n and the numerator of each term in (32.13) is positive. 
We thus conclude that the interaction is attractive and proportional to 
1/R 6 , when R is large; both of these conclusions can be shown to be 
valid for any pair of atoms that are in nondegenerate, spherically sym- 
metric ground states. 

We can obtain an upper limit on the positive quantity — W(R) by 
replacing each E n in (32.13) by the energy E* of the lowest excited state 
of the two hydrogen atoms for which {Q\H'\n*) is different from zero. 2 
Then the denominator can be taken outside of the summation, which 
can be evaluated as a matrix product: 

SII&lt;0|H'|n&gt;|* = S B &lt;0|H»&lt;n|H'|0&gt; - «0|tf'|0» 2 
= &lt;0|tf' 2 |0) - «0|#'|0&gt;) 2 
Since we have seen that (0|ff'|0) = 0, we have that 

- W(B) &lt;P»m. (82.14) 

The state n* is that in which both atoms are excited to states of 
principal quantum number 2, so that E — — 2(e 2 /2a ), E n * = — 2(e 2 /8a ), 
and E n * - E = 3e 2 /4o . From (32.12) we have 

#'2 = j£ ( Xl 2 Z2 2 + 1,^2 + 4zi 22 2 2 + 2x l x i y&lt;y i - • • •) (32.15) 

1 F. London, Z. Physik 63, 245 (1930). 
* A. Unsold, Z. Physik 48, 563 (1927). 



262 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The expectation value of the cross-product terms like #1X22/1^2 is zero 
since these terms are odd functions of one of the cartesian components 
of ri or r 2 . The first three terms in the parenthesis of (32.15) each 
lead to a product of two identical factors that are equal to 

Jx 2 ]u 10 o(t)\ 2 dh = -£j&gt; 2 |« 10 o(r)| 2 d*r 

= 3^/o ° r2e " 2r/0o47rr2rfr = ao2 
so that &lt;0|#' 2 |0&gt; = 6e 4 a 4 /# 6 - Substitution into (37.14) gives 

W(R) &gt; - ^ (32.16) 

VARIATION CALCULATION 

An upper limit on W(R) can always be obtained by the variation method. 
It is apparent, however, that some judgment must be used in the choice 
of the trial function yp; thus, if \j/ does not depend on R, the dependence of 
the expectation value of the energy on R will be like that of H' , that is, 
1/R 3 . An upper limit with this R dependence is of no value to us, since 
what we want to determine is a limit on the coefficient of the 1/R 6 
interaction. A useful choice for \f/ will be one in which there is a term 
proportional to H', since there will then be terms in the expectation 
value that are proportional to H' 2 and hence vary like 1/R*. 
We choose for the trial function 

iKri,r 2 ) = wioo(ri)Mioo(r 2 )(l + AH') 

where A is to be the variation parameter. Since this ip is not normalized , 
we use (32.5) rather than (32.4) and obtain 

F 4. W(Tf\ &lt;r /.Ml + Afl'Xffo + ff')ti (l + AW) dtrx d 'r 2 

Eo + W(R) fjuoHi + AH'yd^d^ 

(32.17) 

where again u is the product of the ground-state hydrogen wave func- 
tions, and A is assumed to be real. The right side of (32.17) can be 
written 

Eo + 2A(0lff"|0) + A*(0\H'HqH'\0) 

1 + A*(0\H ,2 \0) k6Z - Lii) 

since wo is a normalized eigenfunction of H with the eigenvalue 

E = -e 2 /a 

and (0\H'\0) = &lt;0|i7' 3 |0&gt; = 0. It is easily seen that (0\H'H H'\0) is a 
sum of squares of factors of the form $Uioo(t)xHoxuioo(t) d 3 r; this can 
be shown by direct computation to be zero. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 263 

Since we are interested only in terms of order H' 2 , we expand the 
denominator of (32.18) to obtain 

(E + 2A&lt;0|#' 2 |0))(1 + AWIO))- 1 

~ E + (2A - EoA*)(0\H' 2 \0) (32.19) 

If we remember that E is negative, we find that (32.19) has a minimum 
with respect to variation of A when A = 1/E , in which case (32.17) 
becomes 

Ec+W(B) &lt;E a + B&gt; = E -^ (32.20) 

Thus in (32.16) and (32.20) we have both upper and lower limits on the 
interaction energy: 

_ W &lt; W (R) &lt; - ^ (32-21) 

More careful variation calculations have shown that the numerical 
coefficient in W(R) is very nearly 6.50. 1 

33DALTERNATIVE TREATMENT OF THE PERTURBATION SERIES 

We have seen in Sec. 32 how the expression (31.11) for the second-order 
perturbed energy can give a useful limit even when the generalized sum- 
mation S cannot be carried out. In some situations, however, closed- 
form expressions for W 2 and $\, both of which otherwise involve infinite 
summations, can be obtained. We illustrate this first with the problem 
of the second-order Stark effect of a hydrogen atom in its ground state 
and then generalize the procedure to a wider class of situations. 

SECOND-ORDER STARK EFFECT IN HYDROGEN 

The ground state of a hydrogen atom is nondegenerate, and the first- 
order perturbed energy in a uniform external electric field is zero. Our 
problem then is to calculate Eq. (31.11): 

T.-sMf &lt; 331) 

1 See L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, Jr., "Introduction to Quantum Mechanics," sec. 
47a (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1935). The result (32.21) is not strictly correct, since 
W in (32.12) included only the static dipole-dipole interaction between the two atoms. 
In reality, there is also an effect of retardation, which arises from the finite speed of 
propagation of the electromagnetic interaction between the two dipoles. This causes 
W(R) to fall off like - l/R 1 when R is large in comparison with the electromagnetic 
wavelength associated with an atomic transition frequency: R » hcao/e 2 = 137a . 
At such large distances the interaction is uninterestingly small, so that (32.21) actually 
provides useful limits on W(R). See H. B. G. Casimir and D. Polder, Phys. Rev. 73, 
360 (1948). 



264 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The ground state ket |0) in the coordinate representation is 

&lt;r|0&gt; = uioo(r) = (iroo»)-*err/-., 

and E = — e 2 /2a . Equation (33.1) and the variation method are 
used in Prob. 9 to obtain lower and upper bounds, respectively, for W 2 . 
Instead of working directly with Eq. (33.1), we shall first find fi 
by solving the second of Eqs. (31.4) subject to the condition (31.6), and 
then make use of (31.7). 1 With H' given by (31.26), TPi = 0, and the 
second of Eqs. (31.4) is an inhomogeneous differential equation for ^ x : 



(ft* e 2 \ 

— 2~ V 2 — — — j&amp;o ) lAi = — e£r cos 6 u i0 o 



(33.2) 



We show first that the only angle dependence of fa is through a multiply- 
ing factor cos 0. One way of seeing this is to expand \f/i as a series of 
functions of r times spherical harmonics in 6, &lt;f&gt; and to note that each term 
is an eigenf unction of the angular part of V 2 . Then the left side of (33.2) 
is a similar series of spherical harmonics, and the only term we wish to 
retain is that which has the same angular dependence as the right side: 
Yio(6,&lt;j&gt;) or cos 6. An alternative way of seeing the same thing is to note 
that \pi given by (31.9) is a sum over only those unperturbed states u n for 
which a n w fails to vanish; in accordance with (31.10), this means that u„ 
is proportional to cos 9 since the unperturbed state is spherically sym- 
metrical. Thus each term in the series for fa is proportional to cos 0, 
and hence \pi is also. 

We can thus write 

^(r) = f(r) cos (33.3) 

and Eq. (31.6) is automatically satisfied. Substitution of (33.3) into 
(33.2) gives 

dr*^rdr r 2 ' ^ a r J oo 1 - 7 ea (7ra 3 )* (&amp;6A) 

The solution of Eq. (33.4) is expected to have the form of a power series 
in r multiplied by e- rla °; further, the series is expected to start with the 
first or higher power of r, since otherwise (33.3) will be singular at the 
origin. It turns out that the series terminates after two terms, so that the 
solution of (33.4) is 

f( r ) = _( xao i)-*_ ( aor + £ r 2) e -wa. (33 5) 

e 

1 This approach appears to have been first published by M. Kotani, "Quantum 
Mechanics," vol. I, p. 127 (Yuwanami Book Co., Tokyo, 1951). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES MS 

as may be verified by substitution. Thus the wave function that is 
correct through first order in E is 

(ttoo 3 )-^-'' ' [l - \ (a r + £r 2 ) cos 1 (33.6) 

Substitution of the expression for ypi obtained from Eqs. (33.3) and 
(33.5) into (31.7) gives for the second-order perturbed energy 

W 2 = eE(xa »)-»/r cos 2 Of(r)e- r i°° d*r 
= - |£- 3 / " (a r* + ir 5 )e- 2 "/«" dr 

- - ? EW (33.7) 

4 

This expression for the second-order Stark effect was first obtained by 
separation of the wave equation in parabolic coordinates. 1 

POLARIZABILITY OF HYDROGEN 

It was remarked at the end of Sec. 31 that the second-order Stark effect 
could be interpreted in terms of an induced electric dipole moment. 
This induced moment is proportional to the applied electric field and in 
the same direction, and the ratio a of dipole moment to field strength 
is called the polarizability. It is easily seen that these conditions hold 
exactly for a charged isotropic harmonic oscillator and that the energy 
change in this case is -£aE 2 (Prob. 1). For a general system, in which 
the energy change is not exactly proportional to E 2 , it is still true that 

W 2 = -i«E 2 (33.8) 

Comparison of Eqs. (33.7) and (33.8) shows that 

a = fao 3 (33.9) 

for a hydrogen atom its ground state (see Prob. 12). 

iG. Wentzel, Z. Physik 38, 518 (1926); I. Waller, Z. Physik 38, 635 (1926); P. S. 
Epstein, Phys. Rev. 28, 695 (1926). The general expression for the first- and second- 
order Stark effect with nuclear charge Z, in terms of the parabolic quantum numbers 
of Sec. 16,isfn(nx - n 2 )(eEao/^) - (Efco»/16Z*)n*{17n« - 3(m - n 2 )* - 9m* + 19]. 
It should be noted that such a series in powers of E cannot converge since, strictly 
speaking, the system has no bound states. This is so because the electron of a hydro- 
gen atom placed in a uniform electric field can gain enough energy by moving in the 
direction — E to compensate for its binding energy. In other words, the electron can 
tunnel through the potential barrier created by the nuclear coulomb field and the 
external electric field, as discussed in Sec. 17. The rate of spontaneous dissociation 
for a hydrogen atom in an electric field was calculated by J. R. Oppenheimer, Phys. 
Rev. 31, 66 (1928), and is exceedingly small for fields of laboratory strength. Even 
though the series for the perturbed energy in powers of E does not converge, it is 
useful for ordinary field strengths. 



266 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

METHOD OF DALGARNO AND LEWIS 

The foregoing procedure can be generalized in the following way. 1 We 
start with Eq. (31.11), which is applicable to the ground state of any 
system since in all known cases this state is nondegenerate : 

_ „ (0\H&gt;\n)(n\H'\0) 
W * - b » Eo - E n (33 - 10) 

Suppose now that an operator F can be found such that 

^g"«W (33.U) 

for all states n other than the ground state. Substitution into (33.10) 
then gives 

W 2 = S;(0|H»(n|F|0&gt; = (0\H'F\0) - &lt;0|ff'|0&gt;&lt;0|F|0&gt; (33.12) 

where the term n = has first been added in to make the summation 
complete and then subtracted out. Thus, if F can be found, the evalu- 
ation of W 2 is greatly simplified, since only integrals over the unperturbed 
ground-state wave function need be evaluated. 
Equation (33.11) can be written as 

&lt;n|#'|0&gt; = (Eo - E n )(n\F\0) = &lt;n|[F,tf ]|0&gt; 

which is evidently valid if F satisfies the operator equation 

[F,H ] = H' + C 

where C is any constant. However, this last equation is unnecessarily 
general; it is enough that F satisfy the much simpler equation 

[F,H ]|0&gt; = tf'|0&gt; + C|0&gt; (33.13) 

from which it follows that C = - &lt;0|H'|0). 

We now define a new ket |1&gt;, which is the result of operating on |0) 
with F. Then Eq. (33.13) may be written 

(Eo - H )\l) = H'\0) - (0\H'\0)\0) where |1&gt; s F\0) 

(33.14) 

The ket |1&gt; can evidently have an arbitrary multiple of |0) added to it; we 
choose this multiple so that (0|1) = 0. If now Eq. (33.14), which is an 
inhomogeneous differential equation, can be solved for |1), the second- 
order perturbed energy (33.12) can be written in terms of it as 

*&gt; - &lt;0|ff'ID (33.15) 

1 A. Dalgarno and J. T. Lewis, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A233, 70 (1955); C. Schwartz, 
Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 6, 156 (1959). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 2«7 

In similar fashion the series (31.9) for yp\ can be written in closed form: 

^^ s ,\mm = s , JnXnim 

= F|0&gt; - \0)(0\F\0) = |1&gt; (33.16) 

It is apparent that Eqs. (33.15) and (33.16) are consistent with Eq. (31.7), 
as of course they must be. 

The Dalgarno-Lewis method thus replaces the evaluation of the 
infinite summation (31.9) by the solution of the inhomogeneous differ- 
ential equation (33.14). The latter procedure may be much simpler even 
when it cannot be done in closed form, as with (33.4). 

THIRD-ORDER PERTURBED ENERGY 

The ket |1) = F|0) is all that is needed to find the third-order perturbed 
energy W 3 . We make use of Eqs. (31.7), (31.12), (31.13), and the com- 
plex conjugate of (33.11) to write 

W 3 = (u ,H f ^) 



= S 



, &lt;0|*H*&gt;_ / $/ (k\H'\n)(n\H&gt;\0) _ (k\H'W0\B')P) \ 
— E k \ E — E n E — E k ) 



' k E 

- S;&lt;0|iW|*&gt;($:&lt;fc|H'|nXn|F|0&gt; - &lt;fc|F|0&gt;&lt;0|#'|0» 
= &lt;0|Ft#'F|0&gt; - &lt;0|Ft|0)(0|#'F|0&gt; - (0|Ft^'|0)&lt;0|F|0&gt; 
- &lt;0|FtF|0)&lt;0|H'|0&gt; + 2(0|F+|0&gt;&lt;0|ff'|0)(0|F|0&gt; 
= &lt;l|tf'|l) - &lt;1|1)&lt;0|^'|0) (33.17) 

since (0|1) = 0. We thus obtain a closed expression for W 3 as well. 1 

INTERACTION OF A HYDROGEN ATOM AND A POINT CHARGE 

As an example of this method, we now calculate the change in energy of a 
hydrogen atom in its ground state when a point charge Ze is placed at a 
fixed distance R. The perturbation is 

H' = — - Ze * 



R (R 2 + r 2 - 2Rr cos 9)* 



= ~1T 2 (%) l Pi(cosd) (33.18) 

provided that R &gt; r or, equivalently, that R is much greater than a&lt;&gt;. 

1 This result can also be obtained directly from Eqs. (31.4) and (31.6) as a special case 
of the formula derived in Prob. 14. 



268 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

From the structure of Eq. (33.14), we expect that the coordinate 
representation of the ket 1 1) can be written in the form 

00 

&lt;r|l&gt; = X Mr)Pi(cos B) (33.19) 

Substitution of (33.19) into (33.14) leads to the following differential 
equation for fi(r) : 

W 2dJ i _ Zg+J) 2_ _1_ 2Z 

dr 2 ^ rdr r 2 Jl T a r Jl a 2jl a R l+1 (^a ^ 

(33.20) 

As expected, this agrees with Eq. (33.14) when we put I = 1 and E = 
-Ze/R 2 . 

A solution of Eq. (33.20) is easily found in analogy with (33.5) and 
again contains only two terms. Substitution into (33.19) gives 

&lt;'!'&gt; - ,| s^f^ (^r + m) e -"" p - (ms « (33 - 21) 

which, in accordance with (33.16), is equal to ^i(r). Similarly, Eq. 
(33.15) shows that W% is given by 



W, = &lt;0|H&lt;H&gt; = -W I ( ' + 2 ff+ 1)! ^ (33.22) 



Again, the leading term (I = 1) agrees with (33.7) when E = —Ze/R 2 . 

It should be noted that, although Eq. (33.22) gives the first two 
terms of an asymptotic series in 1/R correctly, the third term, which is 
proportional to 1/R*, is dominated by the leading term of W 3 . Equation 
(33.17) shows that W z = (l|.ff'|l) in this case and that the leading term 
for large R is proportional to 1/R 7 (see Prob. 15). x 

34DTHE WKB APPROXIMATION 

In the development of quantum mechanics, the Bohr-Sommerfeld quanti- 
zation rules of the old quantum theory (Sec. 2) occupy a position inter- 
mediate between classical and quantum mechanics. It is interesting that 
there is a method for the approximate treatment of the Schrodinger wave 

'A. Dalgarno and A. L. Stewart, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A238, 276 (1956). It 
should be noted that, unlike the situation with the van der Waals interaction discussed 
in the preceding section, there is no correction arising from retardation in the present 
problem. This is because the only motion is that of a single electron in the electro- 
static potential of two fixed charges. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 269 

equation that shows its connection with the quantization rules. It is 
based on an expansion of the wave function in powers of h, which, although 
of a semieonvergent or asymptotic character, is nevertheless also useful 
for the approximate solution of quantum-mechanical problems in appro- 
priate cases. This method is called the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin or 
WKB approximation, although the general mathematical technique had 
been used earlier by Liouville, Rayleigh, and Jeffreys. 1 It is applicable 
to situations in which the wave equation can be separated into one or more 
total differential equations, each of which involves a single independent 
variable. 

CLASSICAL LIMIT 

A solution ^(r,0 of the Schrodinger wave equation (6.16) 
ih Tt --S^+'W* 

can be written in the form 

+(r,t) = A exp — ±±L 
in which case W satisfies the equation 

w + k^ W) ' + v - 1™ - ° f 34 - 1 ' 

In the classical limit (h — &gt; 0), Eq. (34.1) is the same as Hamilton's partial 
differential equation for the principal function W: 2 

dW 

^ + #(r,p) = p = VW 

Since the momentum of the particle is the gradient of W, the possible 
trajectories are orthogonal to the surfaces of constant W and hence, in the 
classical limit, to the surfaces of constant phase of the wave function ip. 

1 It is sometimes called the BWK method, the classical approximation, or the phase 
integral method. For the original work, see J. Liouville, J. de Math. 2, 16, 418 (1837); 
Lord Rayleigh, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A86, 207 (1912); H. Jeffreys, Proc. London 
Math. Soc. (2)23, 428 (1923); G. Wentzel, Z. Physik. 38, 518 (1926); H. A. Kramers, 
Z. Physik. 39, 828 (1926) ; L. Brillouin, Compt. Rend. 183, 24 (1926). For more recent 
developments, see E. C. Kemble, "The Fundamental Principles of Quantum Mechan- 
ics," sec. 21 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1937) ; R. E Langer, Phys. Rev. 51, 669 (1937) ; 
W. H. Furry, Phys. Rev. 71, 360 (1947); S. C. Miller, Jr., and R. H. Good, Jr., Phys. 
Rev. 91, 174 (1953). The treatment of this section resembles most closely those of 
Kramers and Langer. 

2 E. T. Whittaker, "Analytical Dynamics," 3d ed., sec. 142 (Cambridge, London, 
1927); H. Goldstein, "Classical Mechanics," sec. 9-1 (Addison- Wesley, Reading, 
Mass., 1950). 



270 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Thus in this limit the rays associated with ^ (orthogonal trajectories to the 
surfaces of constant phase) are the possible paths of the classical particle. 
If yp is an energy eigenfunction u{T)e~ iEtlh , W can be written 

W(t,t) = S(r) - Et 

In this case, we have that 

u(x) = A exp ^ ^ (VSy -[E- V(r)] - X ~ V&gt;S = 

(34.2) 

The WKB method obtains the first two terms (one term beyond the 
classical expression) of an expansion of S in powers of h, in the one- 
dimensional case. 

APPROXIMATE SOLUTIONS 

The basic equation that we consider is written in one of the forms 

^ -t- W(x)u = h* &gt; (34.3) 

ax 1 

^ - k\x)u = k 2 &gt; (34.4) 

so that k and k are always real. These are equivalent to the one-dimen- 
sional wave equation (8.5), if we put 

Hx) = + \ {2n[E - V(x)]}&gt; when V(x) &lt; E 

(34.5) 
k(x) = + ^ \MV(x) - E]}i when V(x) &gt; E 

Equations (34.3) and (34.4) are also equivalent to the radial wave 
equation (19.2) if x is replaced by r, V(r) is replaced by 

m(i + 1) 



V(r) + 



2*ir 2 



and u is equal to r times the radial wave function. 

We restrict our attention for the present to Eq. (34.3); we shall be 
able to generalize the resulting expression for u{x) to obtain solutions of 
(34.4). We put 

u(x) = Ae iSM ' h 
which on substitution into (34.3) gives the one-dimensional form of (34.2) 

ihS" - S' 2 + ft 2 fc 2 = (34.6) 

where primes denote differentiation with respect to x. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 271 

We substitute an expansion of S in powers of ft into (34.6) and equate 
equal powers of h. 

s = So + hSi + • • • 

-S'o 2 + 2 M (£ - V) = o 
iS'o - 2S f S[ = etc. 

Integration of these equations gives 

S (x) = ±h J* k(x') dx' Si(x) = \i In k(x) 

where arbitrary constants of integration that can be absorbed in the 
coefficient A have been omitted. We thus obtain to this order of 
approximation 

u(x) = Ak~i exp (±i f* kdx) V &lt; E (34.7) 

In similar fashion, the approximate solution of (34.4) is 

u(x) = Bit* exp (± f x Kdx) V &gt; E (34.8) 

ASYMPTOTIC NATURE OF THE SOLUTIONS 

The accuracy of these WKB solutions can be gauged by comparing the 
magnitudes of the successive terms So and hSi in the series for *S. Since 
So is a monotonic increasing function of x so long as k does not vanish, the 
ratio hSi/So is expected to be small if hS[/S' is small. We thus expect 
(34.7) to be useful in that part of the domain of x where 

« 1 (34.9) 



ns[ 

S'o 


= 


k f 

2k 2 



The local de Broglie wavelength X is 2ir/k, so that (34.9) can be written 



4ir 



which means that the fractional change in k (or the wavelength) in the 
distance X/4tt is small compared with unity. Thus the WKB solutions 
are useful when the potential energy changes so slowly that the momen- 
tum of the particle is sensibly constant over many wavelengths. 

The same criterion is obtained for (34.8) if we now mean by the 
"wavelength" the distance in which the magnitude of u changes by a 
factor e 2r . 

It is apparent that the condition (34.9) is violated near the turning 
points of the classical motion, where V{x) = E, k and k are zero, and the 
"wavelength" is infinite. Thus the solutions (34.7) and (34.8) are 



272 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

asymptotically valid in the sense that they can be used several wave- 
lengths from the nearest turning point if, as is usually the case, the wave- 
length there is slowly varying. 

The asymptotic solutions are most useful if we know how to connect 
an oscillating solution like (34.7) to an exponential solution like (34.8) 
across a turning point. It is in this way, for example, that we apply 
boundary conditions and obtain energy eigenvalues. The derivation of 
such connection formulas, which we consider next, is of interest for this 
reason. However, it should be noted that many applications of the WKB 
approximation do not depend critically on the precise way in which the 
connections are made. 

SOLUTION NEAR A TURNING POINT 

The wave equations (34.3) and (34.4) are regular at a turning point, so 
that there is a solution that is analytic there and has asymptotic forms 
like (34.7) and (34.8). Such a solution usually cannot be written in 
closed form. The wave equation can, however, be modified slightly so 
that an exact solution that has the desired asymptotic forms can be 
obtained. 

We can, without loss of generality, take the origin of a; at a particular 
turning point ; we also assume for the moment that V(x) &lt; E to the right 
of the turning point (positive x) and put £(z) = J Q kdx. Now if 
k*(x) = Cx n , where C is a positive constant, Eq. (34.3) is known to have 
the solutions 

u(x) = A?k-iJ ± M) rn = ^-^ (34.10) 

where J is a Bessel function; this can be verified by direct substitution. 
The asymptotic form of J is such (see below) that (34.10) agrees asymp- 
totically with (34.7). 

We therefore try to retain this form by rewriting (34.3) with an 
additional term 6(x) even when k 2 (x) is not a power of x: 

+ (fc 2 - e)u = (34.11) 

Substitution of (34.10) into (34.11) shows that the new equation is 
satisfied if we define 6 as 

Ws w-S +(m2 -^l (34 - 12) 

We expand A; 2 as a power series in x : 

k\x) = Cx n (l + ax + 6a; 2 + • • • ) 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 



273 



in which case can also be expanded in a series. The 1/x 2 and 1/x terms 
vanish, and the leading term is independent of x. 

3(n + 5)a 2 36 



d(x) 



►o 2(n + 4)(n + 6) n + 6 



(34.13) 



We can now see that (34.11) is a good approximation to the actual 
wave equation (34.3). The similarity in structure between each of the 
three terms in (34.12) and the asymptotic accuracy criterion (34.9) 
indicates that &lt;JC k 2 in the asymptotic region if the WBK method can 
be used at all. At and near the turning point, 6 is not negligible in com- 
parison with k 2 , since 6 is a constant and k 2 vanishes at x = 0. However, 
(34.13) shows that 0(0) is quite small, being of second order in the devia- 
tion of A; 2 from the simple form Cx n . Thus for potential functions V(x) 
that are slowly varying, (34.10) is expected to be a good approximation 
to the actual solution of Eq. (34.3). 

LINEAR TURNING POINT 

We now specialize to the situation of greatest physical interest, in which 
n = 1. A typical linear turning point is shown in Fig. 28; Eq. (34.3) is 
used in region 1 (x &gt; 0), and Eq. (34.4) in region 2 (x &lt; 0). We put 

£i = I k dx, &amp; — / « dx, so that both £1 and £ 2 increase as x moves 
away from the turning point; this makes it easy to generalize the results 
to situations in which the regions 1 and 2 are interchanged. The two 
independent solutions in each of the two regions are 

«i±(«) = A ± ^ik-iJ ±i (^) 
« 2 ±(x) = RfcfcV+Zijte,) 



(34.14) 



It is evident that we must replace J by 7, the Bessel function of imaginary 
argument, in region 2. 




Fig. 28 A typical linear turning point, where V(x) = E at 
x = 0; in region 1, E &gt; V(x), and in region 2, E &lt; V(x). 



274 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

We require the leading terms of the power series expansions and of 
the asymptotic expansions for these functions 1 : 

(to)* 



V ±i (€0 



/=«(&amp;) 



*-o r(i ± $ 
^ r(i ± *) 



It is important to note that the term e~** in the asymptotic expansion 
for J can be retained only when a combination of solutions I ±i is chosen 
such that the coefficient of e*» is zero. This is because other terms in the 
asymptotic expansion, such as et'/b, have been neglected, and these are 
of larger order of magnitude than e _l «. The asymptotic nature of the 
WKB approximation is such that, if the term that increases exponentially 
away from the turning point is present, it is impossible to say whether or 
not the decreasing exponential term is also there. 

CONNECTION AT THE TURNING POINT 

The leading term in k 2 at x = is Cx, so that k ~ cx h , k « c\x\* } £i « 
(2c/3)x*, £2 « (2c/3)|x|*, where c = +C*. Then from (34.14) and 
(34.15) we obtain the behavior of the w's near x = 0: 



«r 



A + r(|) X Ml A- r(|) 

tt + ~ B &lt;&amp;&lt;&amp;£. \ x \ «.- « B row - * 
~ + r($) ' ' 2 r(|) 

It is apparent then that wi + joins smoothly on to u 2 + if B+ = — A + and 
that Mi - joins smoothly on to w 2 ~~ if #- = -4— 

These relations between the coefficients can be used to obtain asymp- 
totic forms like (34.7) and (34.8) for the two independent solutions u + and 
u~ in the two regions (the arbitrary multiplying constants A ± are omitted). 

■» ($**)"* cos Ui - ~\ 

•76) 

(34.16) 






► + « 



(AtA;) - * cos 



(••-5) 



-* (2T«)-»(e«« + e-««-"' 6 ) 



Whittaker and Watson, op. cit., chap. 17. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 275 

The asymptotic forms of any linear combination of u + and u~ can be 
found from Eqs. (34.16). 

ASYMPTOTIC CONNECTION FORMULAS 

Convenient connection formulas between the asymptotic WKB solutions 
in the two regions can be obtained by choosing suitable linear combina- 
tions of u + and u~. Thus the combination u + + u~ contains only the 
decreasing exponential and yields the first connection formula 

i K -i e -{, _» k-i cos ( {l _ !„.) (34. 17 ) 

The arrow in (34.17) implies that the asymptotic solution in region 2 that 
appears on the left goes into the asymptotic solution in region 1 that 
appears on the right but that the converse is not necessarily true. This 
is because a small error in the phase of the cosine introduces the dominant 
increasing exponential in region 2. 1 

Another linear combination of u + and u~ can be found that gives the 
second connection formula 

sin t;k-M« «- k~i cos (£i - far + 17) (34.18) 

where rj is appreciably different from zero or an integer multiple of t. 
The arrow in (34.18) appears since the neglected decreasing exponential 
in region 2 alters the phase of the cosine in region 1 by an indeterminate 
amount if the connection is reversed. 

ENERGY LEVELS OF A POTENTIAL WELL 

We now give a simple example of the application of the WKB approxima- 
tion that serves as a derivation of one of the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantiza- 
tion rules. We wish to find the energy levels of a particle moving in the 
one-dimensional potential well shown in Fig. 29. For any assumed 
energy level E, there are supposed to be just two turning points of the 
classical motion such that 

7(»i) = V(x 2 ) = E 

The regions x &lt; x\ and x &gt; x 2 are type 2 regions in which we know that 
u decreases away from the turning points in order to satisfy the boundary 
conditions at ± 00 . Thus we have only the decreasing exponential WKB 
solution in these regions. 

1 The converse of (34.17) can be used in the following sense: If some parameter in 
the solution (such as the energy E) is varied continuously so that the phase of the 
cosine in region 1 passes through the value — fa, the increasing exponential in region 2 
disappears for some indeterminate value of the phase close to — fa and leaves only the 
decreasing exponential. This result is useful, for example, in treating the resonance 
scattering of alpha particles by a heavy nucleus. 



276 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 




Region 2 *i 



Fig. 29 Application of the WKB method to a potential trough; linear turning 
points occur at x\ and x*. 



The connection formula (34.17) can be applied at the turning point 
xi, which separates a type 2 region from the type 1 region x\ &lt; x &lt; x 2 . 
The only change is that the lower limit on the £i integral is changed from 
to xi, so that the solution to the right of the turning point is 

Ar » cos (f'kdx-fr} (34. 19) 

apart from an arbitrary multiplying constant. The same connection 
formula can also be applied at x 2 by reversing the direction of the x axis 
and changing the fixed limit on the £ integrals from to x%; the arrow in 
(34.17) still means that we go from a region 2 solution to a region 1 solu- 
tion, but now the latter is to the left of the turning point and the former 
is to the right. We redefine £i = J ' k dx, £ 2 = / * dx so that they still 
increase going away from the turning point, in which case (34.17) can be 
used without any modification. The solution to the left of this turning 

point is then kr* cos ( / * kdx — frj, which can be written 

k-i cos (f* k dx - \k - V ) r, = f"kdx-h- (34.20) 

As was the case in the qualitative discussion of discrete energy eigen- 
values in Sec. 8, we obtain the energy levels of this system by requiring 
that the two solutions (34.19) and (34.20) join together smoothly in the 
interior of region 1. This evidently requires that rj be zero or a positive 
integer multiple of ir, since j * k dx is necessarily positive. We can write 
the determining equation for the eigenvalues as 

(34.21) 



/ kdx = (n + ?)■* n = 0, 1, 2, 



Equation (34.21) is to be used for values of n up to the point at which E 
becomes so large that one or both of the turning points disappears. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 277 

A QUANTIZATION RULE 

The expression (34.5) for k can be substituted into (34.21) to give one of 
the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rules of the old quantum theory: 

2 f*' {2tx[E - 7(x)]}» dx = (n + i)h (34.22) 

The left side of (34.22) is the integral around a complete cycle of the 
motion (from Xi to x 2 and back to xi) of the momentum [2n(E — F)]*. 
The right side is the quantum value of the phase integral, with half- 
integer rather than integer quantum numbers. 

It is easily seen from the form of the solution (34.20) that n is the 
number of nodes of the WKB wave function between the turning points. 
Since it is basic to the WKB method that we can develop asymptotic 
solutions like (34.7) only several wavelengths from each turning point, 
the approximation should be good only if the turning points are several 
wavelengths apart, or if n is large in comparison with unity. This con- 
firms the earlier view that the WKB method is a semiclassical approxima- 
tion, since it is expected to be most useful in the nearly classical limit of 
large quantum numbers. 

Actually, the WKB approximation also gives quite good results for 
the low quantum states of many systems. For example, if we apply 
(34.22) to the harmonic oscillator V(x) = £Kx 2 , it is known from the old 
quantum theory that the correct energy levels happen to be obtained for 
all quantum numbers (see Prob. 16). 

SPECIAL BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 

The boundary condition to be applied to a WKB solution at a perfectly 
rigid wall (V changes discontinuously to + &lt;x&gt; at x = x ) is that the wave 
function vanishes there. Thus if k (for a region of type 1) is slowly 
varying up to x and other turning points are remote, the asymptotic 
solution can be used and has the form 

k~l sin ( / kdx) 

Similarly, for a finite potential step that is far from other turning 
points, the asymptotic WKB solutions can be used up to the point of 
discontinuity of V if k or k is slowly varying. Then the magnitudes and 
slopes of the solutions on the two sides can be matched at this point. 

As pointed out after Eq. (34.5), the WKB method can be applied to 
the radial wave equation for a spherically symmetric potential. When 
1 = 0, the radial wave function must be finite at r = 0, and so u must 
vanish there. If k or k is slowly varying there, the asymptotic solutions 
can be used; for example, if E — V(r) is positive, finite, and slowly vary- 



278 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

ing at and near r = 0, the solution is fc _ * sin ( / kdrj. When the 
effective potential energy is infinite at r = 0, either because V itself is 
infinite or because of the centrifugal-force contribution for I ^ 0, the 
situation is more complicated and requires further investigation. 

TUNNELING THROUGH A BARRIER 

Figure 30 shows a typical potential barrier, drawn as a function of the 
radial coordinate; as indicated below Eq. (34.5), the centrifugal term is 
included. In the type 2 region, the wave function is a real exponential 
of the form (34.8). Thus if (" k dr is appreciably larger than unity, the 
behavior of the solution is dominated by the large ratio of the wave 
function at the two turning points. We call the corresponding probabil- 
ity ratio, which is the square of the wave-function ratio, the barrier 
penetration factor P: 

P = exp j— 2 J* «(r) dr where 

«W = + i(2,[^)+55|±«- B ]) , (34.23) 

Tunneling through a square potential barrier, described at the end of 
Sec. 17, is a special case of this. It is easily seen that the dominant 
exponential factor in Eq. (17.8) is just the P given by (34.23). 

In radioactive a decay, V(r) = -\-ZZ'e 2 /r, where Z is the atomic 
number of the final nucleus, and Z' - 2. We assume that this expression 



Region 1 



Fig. 30 Application of the WKB method to a potential barrier, with 
the radial coordinate as the independent variable. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 279 

for the potential is applicable only for r &gt; R ; within the nuclear radius R, 
strong attractive forces more than cancel the coulomb repulsion, so that 
n = R. For I = 0, r 2 = ZZ'e i /E, so that 

/;&lt;w*=^/r /£ (^--*y* 

H 1 -****?)-"*-* (3424) 



tZZ' 



where E = %nv 2 and y ss ZZ'e 2 /ER is the ratio of the coulomb-barrier 
height to the kinetic energy of the emerging a particle. Lifetimes for a 
decay are expected to be of the order of some characteristic time t, divided 
by the P obtained from Eqs. (34.23) and (34.24). In this case, the wave 
function is much larger at r x than at r 2 , and t is roughly the period of 
oscillation of an a particle within the attractive nuclear potential of 
radius R. With t ~ 10~ 21 sec and R somewhat less than 10~ 12 cm, a good 
fit with the observed Z and E dependence is obtained over a range of 
lifetimes of the order of a factor 10 24 . 

The barrier penetration factor also enters into the rate of nuclear 
reactions. In this case the wave function is much larger at r?. than at r\, 
and it is evident that P is in agreement with the Gamow factor, defined 
below Eq. (21.14), when R = 0. 

As another example, we consider whether or not a zero-energy 
particle can be bound; this is of interest in connection with the work of 
Sees. 19 and 39. When E = 0, 

If l = and V(r) has a finite range, this integral is finite, and P^O. 
Similarly, if V(r) extends to infinity and falls off faster than 1/r 2 for large 
r, the integral is finite when r 2 = «&gt; . On the other hand, if I &gt; 0, (34.25) 
is infinite, and P = 0. Thus, as remarked near the end of Sec. 19, 
resonance at zero energy leads to a true bound state if I is not zero. 

As pointed out earlier in this section, the applications of the WKB 
approximation made here do not depend critically on the precise way in 
which the connections across turning points are made. In the derivation 
of the quantization rule (34.22), only the number £ on the right side 
follows from the use of the connection formulas; the discussion of barrier 
penetration does not depend on them at all. 



35DMETHODS FOR TIME-DEPENDENT PROBLEMS 

When the hamiltonian depends on the time, there are no stationary solu- 
tions of the Schrodinger equation. Thus our identification of a bound 



280 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

state with a discrete energy level and stationary eigenfunction must be 
modified. We consider in this section three ways in which this modifica- 
tion can be made, each of which corresponds to a particular kind of 
approximation. The time-dependent perturbation theory, which is some- 
times called the method of variation of constants, assumes as in Sec. 31 that 

H = H + H' Hou k = E k u k (35.1) 

where H is simple and H' is small. However, H' now depends on the 
time and has the effect of causing transitions between eigenstates of H 
that would be stationary in the absence of H'. Alternatively, rather than 
decompose the hamiltonian in accordance with (35.1), the abiabatic 
approximation assumes that H contains parameters that change very 
slowly with time. Thus the system is expected to be described approxi- 
mately by means of stationary eigenfunctions of the instantaneous 
hamiltonian. Finally, we consider the sudden approximation, in which H 
is constant in time except for a very short time interval in which it changes 
from one form to another. 

TIME-DEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 1 

We must now work with the time-dependent Schrodinger equation 

in d 4 = H+ (35.2) 

at 

rather than with the first of Eqs. (31.1). Our procedure consists in 
expressing \p as an expansion in the eigenfunctions u n e~ iE « tlh of the unper- 
turbed time-dependent wave equation, where the expansion coefficients 
evidently depend on the time: 

* = Sna n (t)u n e- iE ««» (35.3) 

Substitution of (35.3) into (35.2) gives 

SnihdnUniT***"* + S n a n E n u n e- iE ^ h = S„a n (# + #&gt; B e-**»&lt;/ A 

where the dot denotes differentiation with respect to the time. 

We replace H u n by E n u n on the right side, multiply through on the 
left by u*, and integrate over all space, making use of the orthonormality 
of the u's: 

ihd k e- iE '« h = S«a»e-**-«*&lt;A;|jy'|n&gt; 

We define the Bohr (angular) frequency 

E k — E n 



«** 



P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A112, 661 (1926) ; A114, 243 (1927) 



(35.4) 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 281 

and obtain 

dk =' (ih^SniklH'ln^e**** 1 (35.5) 

The group of Eqs. (35.5) for all k is exactly equivalent to the Schrddinger 
equation (35.2). 

INTERACTION PICTURE 

Two kinds of changes have been made in going from (35.2) to (35.5). 
First, we have changed the representation from being specified in terms of 
the coordinates to being specified in terms of the unperturbed energy- 
eigenvalues (see Sec. 23). Second, we have changed from the Schrddinger 
to the interaction picture (see Sec. 24). It is worth looking at these two 
changes in some detail. The Schrodinger-picture ket \a s (t)) corresponds 
to the wave function \f/ and has the representation in terms of eigenvalues 
of the unperturbed hamiltonian H , 

(k\a 8 (t)) = (u*,*) = a k (t)e-W» (35.6) 

where use has been made of Eq. (35.3). The interaction picture ket 
\ai(t)) may be found from the first of Eqs. (24.12); in the same repre- 
sentation it is 

&lt;fc|a/(0&gt; = (k\e iB o^\ as (t)) = (k\e iH os^\ n )(n\a s (t)) 

where Sn is implied on the right side. The first bracket expression on the 
right side is simply e iE * tlh (k\n), since H s is diagonal in this representation. 
Thus, with the help of (35.6), we find that 

(k\a r (t)) = o*(0 

The perturbation that appears in (35.1) or (35.5) is given in the 
Schrddinger picture and thus should be designated H' s . It may be found 
in the interaction picture from the second of Eqs. (24.12), which in our 
representation is 

&lt;*|#i|n&gt; = (k\e iB ^i^j){j\H' s \l){l\e- iH ^i h \n) 
= ««*"*&lt;Jb|fffl|n}e-**-"» 
= (k\H' 8 \n)e^ 

Thus the equation of motion (24.13) for the ket in the interaction picture, 
expressed in the Ho representation, is identical with Eq. (35. 5). 1 

1 Because this equation was first obtained by Dirac (loc. cit.) in connection with the 
time-dependent perturbation theory, the interaction picture is sometimes called the 
Dirac -picture. 



2S2 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

FIRST-ORDER PERTURBATION 

We now return to Eq. (35.5), replace H' by \H', and express the a's as 
power series in X : 

a„ = a n «» + \a n &lt;» + X 2 a„&lt; 2) + • • • (35.7) 

As in Sec. 31, we assume that this series is a continuous analytic function 
of X for X between zero and one. We therefore substitute (35.7) into 
(35.5), equate coefficients of corresponding powers of X, and set X = 1 in 
the final results. The substitution yields the set of equations 

d*«» = 4* +1) = m-'SniklH'l^an^e^ 1 (35.8) 

These can, in principle, be integrated successively to obtain approximate 
solutions to any desired order in the perturbation. 

The first of Eqs. (35.8) shows that the zero-order coefficients a k (0) are 
constant in time. Their values are the initial conditions of the problem 
and specify the state of the system before the perturbation is applied. 
We shall assume that all except one of the a* (0) are zero, so that the system 
is initially in a definite unperturbed energy state. 1 The results that we 
shall obtain can easily be generalized to situations in which more than one 
of the zero-order coefficients are different from zero. 

We thus put o* (0) = (k\m) = b km or 8(k — m), according as the 
initial state m is one of a discrete or continuous set. Integration of the 
first-order equation gives 

a*&lt;»(0 = (ifi)~ l J'_ m &lt;fc|H' (*')!»»&gt;«*•*-*' M (35.9) 

where the constant of integration is taken to be zero in order that o* (1) be 
zero at t = — &lt;x&gt; (before the perturbation is applied). If H' is of finite 
duration, the amplitude of a state u k (k ?* m) after the perturbation has 
disappeared is proportional to the time Fourier component of the matrix 
element of the perturbation between this state and the initial state that 
corresponds to the angular frequency u km given in (35.4). 

HARMONIC PERTURBATION 

Equation (35.9) takes a particularly simple form if the perturbation H' 
depends harmonically on the time except for being turned on at one time 
and off at a later time. We call these two times and U, respectively, and 

1 This need not conflict with the uncertainty relation (3.3), since the infinite lapse of 
time prior to the application of the perturbation makes it possible to determine the 
original energy of the system with arbitrarily great precision. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES *» 

assume that we can write 

(k\H'(t')\m) = 2(k\H'\m) sin &lt;rt' (35.10) 

where {k\H'\m) is independent of the time and u&gt; is denned to be positive. 
Substitution into (35.9) gives for the first-order amplitude at any time t 
at or after to 

«w ^ n (k\H'\m) /e«-*-+-&gt;*» - 1 e *"*-—"* - 1 \ 

(35.11) 

The structure of Eq. (35.11) suggests that the amplitude is apprecia- 
ble only when the denominator of one or the other of the two terms is 
practically zero. The first term is important when w km « -w or £ t « 
E m — hw, and the second term is important when u km «p &amp; or E k ~ E m + 
h&lt;a. Thus the first-order effect of a perturbation that varies sinusoidally 
in the time with angular frequency a&gt; is to transfer to or receive from the 
system on which it acts the Planck quantum of energy ha. l This concept 
will be used to treat radiation processes in Chap. 11. 

For the present, we specialize to a situation in which the initial state 
m is a discrete bound state and the final state k is one of a continuous set 
of dissociated states. Then E k &gt; E m , and only the second term in (35. 11) 
need be considered. The first-order probability of finding the system in 
the state A; after the perturbation is removed is 

|»»(« &gt; &lt;o)|° = 4&lt;*|g'NI'*''««* r -"&gt;fc (35.12) 

' v — " n 2 (a&gt;*m — «) 2 

TRANSITION PROBABILITY 

The factor sin 2 £(«*„ - a)to/(o) km - co) 2 is plotted in Fig. 31 as a function 
of u km — w- The height of the main peak increases in proportion to to 2 , 
and its breadth decreases inversely as to, so that the area under the curve 
is proportional to * . Thus if there is a group of states k that have 
energies nearly equal to E m + hw, and for which (k\H'\m) is roughly inde- 
pendent of k, the probability of finding the system in one or another of 
these states is proportional to t . This is the physically interesting situa- 
tion, since what we wish to calculate eventually is a transition probability 
per unit time, w, and this implies that the probability that a transition has 

1 This is related to the reason for the insertion of the factor 2 on the right side of Eq. 
(35.10) in defining the time-independent matrix element {k\H'\m). A perturbation 
that is proportional to sin cat or to cos cot contains both time factors e iwt and e~ iat with 
equal amplitude. Since only the time factor e~ iat leads to transfer of energy from the 
perturbation to the unperturbed system, the insertion of the factor 2 ensures that the 
physically important matrix element of the perturbation is (k\H'\m) and not half 
this quantity. 



284 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 




Fig. 31 The ordinate is proportional to the first-order perturbation probability of 
finding a system in a state of energy E k = E m + Aw* m ; the heights of the secondary 
peaks fall off like l/(co* m — «) 2 . 



taken place after the perturbation has been on for a time 1 is proportional 
to to. 1 

The spread of energy of the final states to which transitions occur is 
connected with the uncertainty relation (3.3) in the following way. We 
can regard the perturbation H ' as a device that measures the final energy 
of the system by transferring it to one of the states k. The time available 
for the measurement is U, so that the uncertainty in energy predicted by 
(3.3) is of order h/U; this is in agreement with the breadth of the main 
peak in Fig. 31. It is interesting to note that conservation of energy, as 
expressed by the relation E k « E m + ho&gt; and suitably modified by the 
uncertainty principle, is an automatic consequence of the calculation and 
does not have to be inserted as a separate assumption. 

The transition probability per unit time is given by integrating 



1 We assume that the total transition probability to all states k is small enough in 
comparison with unity so that the initial state m is not significantly depleted. This 
is equivalent to the original assumption that the perturbation is small, which means 
that for times to of physical interest there is little change in the initial state. There 
can still be an effect of observable magnitude if a large number of independent systems 
receive identical treatment. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 285 

(35.12) over k and dividing by t : 

w = T f ,a * a)( ' ~ * o)|2p(A;) dEk (3513) 

where p{k) dE k is the number of final states with energies between E k and 
E k + dE k . The concept of an energy density p(k) of final states is sensi- 
ble, since we are considering the case in which the transition is to one or 
another of a continuous set of dissociated states. We now take advantage 
of the fact that the breadth of the main peak in Fig. 31 becomes small as to 
becomes large, and we regard (k\H'\m) and p(k) as quantities sufficiently 
independent of E k so that they can be taken outside the integral in Eq. 
(35.13). We further simplify the integral by changing the integration 
variable from E k to x = ^(co km — u&gt;)h and extending the limits on x to 
± oo. Substitution of (35.12) into (35.13) then gives 1 

9ir 

w = ^ p(k)\(k\H'\m)\* (35.14) 

where we have made use of the result /_ ^ x~ 2 sin 2 xdx = ir. This 

expression for w is independent of to, as expected. 

There may be several different groups of final states ki, &amp; 2 , . . . , 
all of which have about the same energy E m + hoi but for which the 
perturbation matrix elements (ki\H'\m) and the densities of states p(fcj), 
although nearly constant within each group, differ from one group to 
another. Then Eq. (35.14), with k replaced by k it gives the transition 
probability per unit time to the ith group. 

It is apparent that the foregoing treatment fails to give a transition 
probability that is proportional to the time if the final as well as the 
initial state is discrete. In this case, Eq. (35.12) shows that \a k w (t &gt; t Q )\ 2 
depends in a peculiar way on to and on &lt;a km — oo. We return to this 
situation in Chap. 11 in connection with radiation processes. 

IONIZATION OF A HYDROGEN ATOM 

As an example of the first-order time-dependent perturbation theory, we 
now calculate the probability of ionization of a hydrogen atom initially 
in its ground state when it is placed in a harmonically time-varying 
electric field. We might, for instance, think of the atom as being placed 
between the plates of a capacitor to which an alternating voltage is 
applied. This is, of course, not a realistic situation, since the circular 

1 Equation (35.14) together with its analog for co = 0, which will be discussed in Sec. 
37, is so useful that it was called "Golden Rule No. 2" by E. Fermi, "Nuclear Physics," 
p. 142 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1950). 



286 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

frequency o/2ir must exceed ne A /4xh 3 = 3.6 X 10 15 cycles/sec in order 
for ionization to occur. However, the electric field produced by the 
capacitor can be regarded as a model for the field associated with a travel- 
ing electromagnetic wave that lies in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum. 
The perturbation H' is given by Eq. (31.26), where in accordance 
with (35.10) we write 

E(0 = 2Eosinw* (35.15) 

The initial ground state of the hydrogen atom is obtained from Eqs. 
(16.24) withZ = 1: 

u m = t*ioo(r) = (W)-*e- r/a ° (35.16) 

The final states should correspond to the motion of a positive-energy 
electron in the coulomb field of the proton (scattering states). However, 
as suggested by the discussion in Sec. 21, these wave functions are rather 
complicated, and it is instructive to consider only the much simpler 
approximate situation in which the coulomb interaction is neglected after 
ionization has occurred. Then the final states are free-particle momen- 
tum eigenf unctions (plane waves). It is convenient to use box normal- 
ization, so that 

u k = L~* exp (zk • r) (35. 17) 

where hk is the momentum of the ejected electron. 

DENSITY OF FINAL STATES 

The density of final states can be found from the permitted values of k 
in a box: k x — 2irn x /L, etc., where the n's are positive or negative integers 
or zero. Thus there are (L/2ir) 3 dk x dk y dk z states in the range dk x dk y dk t 
of the propagation vector. Energy conservation gives E k — E m -f hoi, 
or h 2 k 2 /2n = —fxe i /2h 2 + ho&gt;, so that the magnitude of k is fixed. The 
matrix element that appears in (35.14) will, however, depend on the 
direction of k, and so it is reasonable to define groups of final states ki 
each of which corresponds to an infinitesimal range of directions for the 
motion of the ejected electron. We therefore express the range of the 
propagation vector, which is given above in rectangular coordinates, 
in terms of spherical coordinates as k 2 dk sin dd d&lt;j&gt;, where 6, &lt;f&gt; are 
the polar angles of k with respect to some direction which we take 
for convenience to be that of the electric field. Then p(k) dE k is equal 
to (L/2ir) 3 k 2 dk sin dd d&lt;{&gt;, where dE k and dk are related by differentiation 
of the equation E k = h 2 k 2 /2(M. We thus obtain 

P (k) = ^5 k sin 6 dd d&lt;t&gt; (35.18) 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 



287 



IONIZATION PROBABILITY 

The matrix element that is to be inserted into Eq. (35.14) is obtained 
from Eqs. (31.26), (35.10), and (35.15) and the initial and final wave 
functions (35.16) and (35.17). The result is 



(k\H'\m) = eEo(irOo 8 L 3 )-iJe-*'* rco »»Vcos0"e-'-/ o »d 3 r 



(35.19) 



where 0' is the angle between r and k, and 0" is the angle between r and 
the electric field. As remarked in the preceding subsection, we use to 
denote the angle between k and the electric field. The integration over 
the direction of the vector r may be performed either using k as the polar 
axis (in which case 0" must be expressed in terms of 0' and 0) or using the 
electric field direction as the polar axis (in which case 0' must be expressed 
in terms of 0" and 0). It is simpler to adopt the first procedure and put 

cos 0" = cos 0' cos + sin 0' sin cos (&lt;£' — x) 

Here 0', 4&gt;' are the polar angles of r with respect to k as polar axis, and 
0, x are the polar angles of the electric field direction with respect to k, 
as in Fig. 32. 



zlk 




Fig. 32 Diagram for the integration of the matrix element (35. 1 9). 



288 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

We can now replace d*r by r 2 dr d(cos 0') d&lt;f&gt;' in Eq. (35.19). The $' 
integration causes the second term in the above expression for cos 0" to 
vanish. The rest of the evaluation of the matrix element is straight- 
forward and leads to 

,,,„,, v 32m'eEo&amp;a&lt;) 5 cos ^ 

(k\H'\m) = — 



(7ra 3 L 3 )i(l + k*a 2 ) 3 



Substitution of this matrix element, together with the expression (35.18) 
for p(fc), into (35.14) gives for the probability per unit time that the 
electron of the hydrogen atom is ejected into the solid angle sin dd d&lt;J&gt; 

... _ 256/xWEo 2 a 7 cog2 e gin e de d4&gt; (35 2Q) 



ir/i 3 (l -(- yfc 2 a 2 ) 6 



The differential ionization probability per unit solid angle, 
w/(sin dd6d4&gt;), is proportional to cos 2 0. This is not surprising, since 
the probability amplitude is expected to be proportional to the component 
of the driving force in the direction of ejection, which is eEo cos 6. The 
dependence of w on co is given most reliably when « is large, since then k 
is also large, and the modification of the plane-wave final state by the 
coulomb field of the proton is expected to be least important. This may 
be seen from Eq. (21.13), which shows that, for large k or small n, \u e (0)\ 2 
approaches 1/v, which is the probability density at r = for a plane 
wave that is normalized to unit flux. 

SECOND-ORDER PERTURBATION 

It is a straightforward matter to substitute an expression like (35.11) 
into the right side of the second of Eqs. (35.8) and integrate the resulting 
equation for d* (2) . Without going through the rather lengthy details of 
this calculation, it is not difficult to see that the second-order amplitude 
contains terms that are appreciable when u km is close to 2co, — 2w, and 0. 
Terms of this type are physically plausible, since they correspond respec- 
tively to the absorption of two Planck quanta hu by the system, the 
emission of two quanta, and the absorption and emission of one quantum. 
Such two-quantum processes are expected from a second-order calcula- 
tion in which the perturbation acts twice, in analogy with the one-quan- 
tum processes obtained as the result of the first-order calculation. 

Unfortunately, however, the second-order amplitude also contains 
terms that are appreciable for other values of «* m . A careful analysis 
shows that these unphysical terms arise from the earlier assumption that 
the perturbation (35.10) is turned on suddenly at t = 0. The resulting 
discontinuity in the time derivative of the perturbation introduces Fourier 
components that are responsible for the secondary peaks in Fig. 31. In 
reality the perturbation will usually be turned on gradually during a time 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 2» 

interval that will be much longer than 1/w, so that the breadth of the 
Fourier transform of the perturbation, which has a maximum at w, will 
be small in comparison with o&gt;. Also, this time interval will be much 
shorter than the total time t that the perturbation is on, in order that 
t can be specified with reasonable accuracy. The sudden turning on of 
the perturbation does not cause serious difficulties in first order, since we 
were able to ignore the secondary peaks in Fig. 31 even though their 
heights fall off only as l/(a&gt;* m -co) 2 . In second order, however, the 
effects are more marked and cannot be ignored; it is necessary then to 
turn the perturbation on slowly, and this complicates the calculation. 
We shall not pursue this further here, but the problem will arise 
again in Sec. 37 in connection with collision theory. The case in which 
a sudden change in the hamiltonian of a system is an essential part of 
the physical situation, rather than merely a mathematical convenience 
as in the derivation of (35.11), is discussed toward the end of this section. 

ADIABATIC APPROXIMATION 1 

It was remarked at the beginning of this section that methods can be 
developed for treating systems in which the time dependence of the 
hamiltonian is small, slowly varying, or rapidly varying; these correspond 
to the perturbation, adiabatic, and sudden approximations, respectively. 
In the adiabatic case, we expect on physical grounds that solutions of 
the Schrodinger equation can be approximated by means of stationary 
eigenfunctions of the instantaneous hamiltonian, so that a particular 
eigenfunction at one time goes over continuously into the corresponding 
eigenfunction at a later time. In other words, if the equation 

H(t)u n (t) = E n (t)u n (t) (35.21) 

can be solved at each instant of time, we expect that a system that is in 
a discrete nondegenerate state u m (0) with energy E m (0) at t = is likely 
to be in the state u m (t) with energy E m (t) at time t, provided that H(t) 
changes very slowly with time. Our objective is to estimate the extent 
to which this expectation is not fulfilled, so that other states appear in 
the expansion of ^ in terms of the w's. 

The wave function ^ satisfies the time-dependent Schrodinger 
equation 

ih ^ = H (0* (35.22) 

at 

We proceed by expanding \p in terms of the w's in the following way: 
* = J a n (t)u n (t) exp [(ih)- 1 /J E n (t f ) dt'] (35.23) 

n 
1 M. Born and V. Fock, Z. Phys. 51, 165 (1928). 



290 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

where we assume that the u n are orthonormal, discrete, and nondegen- 
erate. Substitution into Eq. (35.22) gives 

^ \dnUn + On ^1 exp \ (ifi)- 1 ft E n (t') cft'l = 

where use has been made of (35.21). We multiply through on the left 
by u* and integrate over all space to obtain 

d* = - ^ «»&lt;*l*&gt; exp [(ifi)- 1 j l Q (E n - E k ) &lt;&amp;'] 

n 

&lt;*|A&gt; - / u* k ^ dh (35.24) 

An expression for {k\fi) can be found by differentiating Eq. (35.21) with 
respect to the time: 

dH „ du n dE„ „ dun 

We multiply through on the left by u*, where k ^ n, integrate over all 
space, and make use of Eqs. (23.21) and (35.21) to obtain 

dH n^ = (E n ~ E k )(k\A) k^n (35.25) 



4 
v 



dt 



CHOICE OF PHASES 

We also require an expression for (n\A). Differentiation of the equation 
(n\n) = 1 with respect to time gives 

&lt;a|n&gt; + (n|n&gt; = 

Since these two terms are complex conjugates of each other, each is purely 
imaginary, and we can write (n\n) = ia(t), where a(t) is real. We now 
change the phase of u n by an amount y(t), which is permissible since the 
phases of the eigenfunctions are arbitrary at each instant of time. For 
the new eigenf unction u' n = u n e iyW , 

(n'\tf) = (n\ti) + iy = i(a + y) 

Thus the choice 7(0 = — / a(t') dt' for the phase makes (n'\h') = 0. 

In what follows, we assume that all phases have been chosen in this way 
and omit the primes. 

Substitution of (35.25) into (35.24) then gives 



a k 



2' &amp; (*| f I »&gt; exp [&lt; /.' -&lt;" *] &lt; 35 - 26) 



291 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 

where the prime on the summation indicates that the term n = A; is 
omitted. The group of Eqs. (35.26) for all k is exactly equivalent to 
the Schrodinger equation (35.22). 

We can now estimate d k by assuming that all quantities (a„, w kn , 
u n , dH/dt) that appear on the right side of (35.26), and which are expected 
to be slowly varying, are actually constant in time. If, further, we 
assume that the system is in the state m at t = 0, we can put a n = 8 nm . 
We thus obtain 



Ok « (fitokm) l (k 



dH 



dt 

which is readily integrated to give 

dH 



\ e i«&gt;kmt k 7* TO 



o*(0 « (ibukn?)- 1 (k ^ n^ (e«&lt;*- ( - 1) k*m 



(35.27) 



With the above approximations, Eq. (35.27) shows that the prob- 
ability amplitude for a state other than the initial state oscillates in time 
and shows no steady increase over long periods of time even though H 
changes by a finite amount. The magnitude of this amplitude after a 
long time is of the order of the ratio of the change in H during the Bohr 
period 2ir/u km to the energy difference E k — E m between the states. 

CONNECTION WITH PERTURBATION THEORY 

An exceptional situation arises when the hamiltonian oscillates in time 
with a frequency nearly equal to one of the transition frequencies, say 
&lt;a km . This is a case of resonance, and we expect from the discussion of 
time-dependent perturbation theory earlier in this section that even a 
very small change in H can produce an appreciable amplitude a k over 
long periods of time, so that (35.27) cannot be valid. The reason for 
the failure is that it is then no longer permissible to assume that the time 
dependence of dH/dt can be neglected, so that the passage from (35.26) 
to (35.27) is not justified. 

In order to consider this case in a way that permits comparison with 
the results of perturbation theory, we assume that only a small part of 
H oscillates in time with an angular frequency « that is close to \u km \ : 

dH 

H = H + 2H' sin wt -^ = 2a&gt;H' cos ut 

where H' is small compared with H and both are constant in time. If 
the dependence of o„, «*„, and u n on time is neglected and we put a„ = 8 nm 
as before, Eq. (35.26) becomes 

d k « -r^- (fc|H , |TO)(e i(Mt " ,+M) ' + e*&lt;-*-"-&gt;0 

nUkm 



292 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

which is readily integrated to give 

a k (t) « \' ' ( x H ) (35.28) 

WiCOfcm \ C0jfc m + W 03km — 03 / K ' 

Equation (35.28) shows first that the adiabatic approximation 
breaks down for « im ~ ±«, since then (35.28) increases steadily with 
the time. It also shows that the perturbation result (35.11) is repro- 
duced. If 03 km is close to +co, the first term in the parentheses can be 
neglected and we can replace o3/o3 km outside the parentheses by +1; if 
03km is close to — 03, the second term in the parentheses can be neglected 
and we can replace «/W m by —1. 

DISCONTINUOUS CHANGE IN H 

As an introduction to the sudden approximation, we consider first a 
situation in which the hamiltonian changes discontinuously from one 
form that is constant in time to another. Suppose that H = H for 
t &lt; and H = H x for t &gt; 0, where 

H U n = E n U n HtVp = £&gt;„ 

and the it's and v's are complete orthonormal sets of functions that are 
not necessarily discrete. The general solutions can be written 

^ = SnOnUne-***'!* t &lt; 

* = SAv*-"""* t&gt; o (35-29) 

where the a's and 6's are independent of the time. 

Since the wave equation (35.22) is of first order in the time, the 
wave function at each point in space must be a continuous function of 
the time at t = 0, although its time derivative is not. The 6's are then 
readily expressed in terms of the a's by equating the two solutions (35.29) 
at t = 0, multiplying by a particular v*, and integrating over the 
coordinates : 

K = S re a»&lt;M|n&gt; (35.30) 

If the system is initially in the state m, so that a n = (n\m), Eq. (35.30) 
tells us that &amp; M = (n\m), and final states appear that do not have the 
same energy as the initial state. This is a consequence of the nonzero 
frequency Fourier components into which the suddenly changing hamil- 
tonian can be resolved. 

SUDDEN APPROXIMATION 1 

The sudden approximation consists in using Eq. (35.30) when the change 
in the hamiltonian occupies a very short but finite interval of time t . 
In order to make an estimate of the error introduced in this way, we 
1 W. Pauli, Handbuch d. Physik 24, part 1, 164 (1933). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES »3 

consider a problem that, although somewhat artificial, can easily be 
solved formally. Suppose that H = H for t &lt; 0, H = Hi for t &gt; U, and 
H — Hi for &lt; t &lt; t . The intermediate hamiltonian, which is assumfd 
to be constant in time, has a complete set of energy eigenf unctions: 

H ,40, = E K w K 

The true solution can be expanded in terms of the w's with constant 
coefficients: 

* = S.cw.e-^*"* &lt; t &lt; t 

The continuity condition at t = gives c K = S n a n (ic\n), and the 
continuity condition at t = to then gives 

&amp;„ = S.c^/il^e-*'^-^)'./* 

= SnanSMxy^'-^'W (35.31) 

When t = 0, the exponential is equal to unity, and an equation like 
(23.9') shows that &amp; M is given by (35.30), as it should be. 

The sudden approximation is evidently best when t is small. The 
exponential in (35.31) can then be expanded to give 

&amp;„ « Sna„S,&lt;M|K&gt; [l ~ y (E K - E„) j ( K \n) 

which can be rewritten as 

b» « SnOnial U-J W&lt; - #,)] \n) (35.32) 

by making use of the formalism of Sec. 23. Thus the error in the sudden 
approximation is proportional to to for small to and can be estimated in 
simple cases from Eq. (35.32). This equation can be generalized to a 
situation in which Hi depends on the time; in this case a result that is 

/to 
Hi dt. 

An interesting special case of Eq. (35.32) is that in which the initial 
and final hamiltonians are the same (Hi = Ho) and the system is initially 
in a particular state m. We then obtain 

6*= &amp; km - l -£(k\(Hi-H )\m) 

This can be used even when Hi — H is not small in comparison with H , 
provided that t is sufficiently small. On the other hand, the perturba- 
tion theory given earlier in this section is useful when H t — H &lt;3C H 
and to is large. 



294 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

DISTURBANCE OF AN OSCILLATOR 

As a simple example of the application of the adiabatic and sudden 
approximations, we consider a linear harmonic oscillator in which the 
position of the equilibrium point a(t) depends on the time. The hamil- 
tonian for this system is 

*M--ss 5? + ***-•«"■ 

The instantaneous energy eigenfunctions are the harmonic-oscillator wave 
functions (13.13) centered at the point a(t), and the energy levels are 
unchanged : 

u n {x) = N n H n [a(x - a)]«r»« , &lt;— &gt;' E n = (n + i)fcco c 

We suppose first that the equilibrium point moves slowly, and we 
investigate the circumstances under which the adiabatic approximation 
is applicable. If the oscillator is initially in its ground state (n = 0), 
the time derivative of the hamiltonian dH/dt = —K(x — a)d has a non- 
vanishing matrix element only with the first excited state. With the 
help of (13.18) this is found to be 

( 1 — 0) = 7= = -Kd - ) (Km)-* 

\ dt / «V2 \2/ 

Substitution into (35.27) shows that the coefficient of the time-dependent 
factor in the amplitude of the first excited state has the magnitude 

Kd (ft/2)* d 

hue 2 (Km)i (2*» e /«i)» &amp;*.**) 

Equation (35.33) may be interpreted physically by noting that the denom- 
inator is of the order of the maximum speed of a hypothetical classical 
oscillator that has the zero-point energy. Thus the adiabatic approxi- 
mation is good if the equilibrium point moves slowly in comparison with 
the classical-oscillator speed. It is not difficult to see that, for the nth 
excited state, the corresponding condition is that the equilibrium-point 
speed be small in comparison with 1/n times the corresponding classical- 
oscillator speed. 

Application of the sudden approximation to an oscillator in its 
ground state gives for the probability amplitude of the nth state after 
displacement of the equilibrium point from x = to x = a 

- k f" u*(x - a)e-****dx = ^ (* uZ(z)e-W x+a)1 dx (35.34) 

&lt;Jfl J —IB -Jft J — 00 

This integral is identical with the expression for A n in Eq. (13.21), except 
for the sign of a, and has already been evaluated with the help of the 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES 



295 



generating function (13.10) for the Hermite polynomials. The earlier 
discussion (Sec. 13) shows that the states most likely to be excited are 
those that have a classical amplitude of oscillation that is of the order 
of the displacement o; this is in agreement with the corresponding 
classical result. Equation (35.32) can then be used to show that the 
sudden approximation is valid in this case if the time required to move 
the equilibrium point is small in comparison with l/n times the classical- 
oscillator period, where n is the quantum number of the state most 
likely to be excited. 



PROBLEMS 

1. A one-dimensional harmonic oscillator of charge e is perturbed by an electric field 
of strength E in the positive x direction. Calculate the change in each energy level to 
second order in the perturbation, and calculate the induced electric dipole moment. 
Show that this problem can be solved exactly, and compare the result with the per- 
turbation approximation. Repeat the calculation for a three-dimensional isotropic 
oscillator. Show that, if the polarizability a. of the oscillator is defined as the ratio of 
the induced electric dipole moment to E, the change in energy is exactly — fatE 2 . 

2. A one-dimensional harmonic oscillator is perturbed by an extra potential energy 
bx*. Calculate the change in each energy level to second order in the perturbation. 

3. Find the first-order Stark effect for a hydrogen atom in the state n = 3. Sketch 
the arrangement of the levels and state the quantum numbers associated with each. 

4. A system that has three unperturbed states can be represented by the perturbed 
hamiltonian matrix 

J5a a 
Ei b 
a* b* Ei 

where Ei &gt; E\. The quantities a and b are to be regarded as perturbations that are 
of the same order and are small compared with E% — E\. Use the second-order non- 
degenerate perturbation theory to calculate the perturbed eigenvalues (is this pro- 
cedure correct?). Then diagonalize the matrix to find the exact eigenvalues. Finally, 
use, the second-order degenerate perturbation theory. Compare the three results 
obtained. 

5. A trial function $ differs from an eigenfunction ue by a small amount, so that 
}p = ub + «^i, where ue and \pi are normalized and e &lt;3C 1. Show that (H) differs 
from E only by a term of order « J , and find this term. 

6. If the first n — 1 eigenfunctions of a particular hamiltonian are known, write a 
formal expression for a variation-method trial function that could be used to get an 
upper limit on the nth energy level. 

7. Find the next terms (of order R~*) in the expansion of Eq. (32.12). Show that 
their diagonal matrix element for the unperturbed ground state vanishes, so that there 
is no inverse fourth-power contribution to the van der Waals interaction. 

8. Use the first nonvanishing term in the series (32.13) to get a lower limit for 
— W(R). Compare with that obtained from the variation calculation. 



M« QUANTUM MECHANICS 

9. Use the combination of perturbation and variation methods employed in Sec. 32 
in connection with the van der Waals interaction to obtain limits on the electric 
polarizability of a hydrogen atom in its ground state. 

10. A particle of mass m is bound by the potential V(r) = — Vae~ rla , where 
.h'/tnVta 2 = -|. Use the variation method with the trial function e~ ar to get a good 

limit on the lowest energy eigenvalue. 

11. A hydrogen atom is placed in a uniform electric field of strength E. Use Eq. 
(33.6) to calculate the total electric field at the nucleus. Give a qualitative discussion 
of your answer in physical terms. 

12. Make use of Eq. (33.6) to calculate the electric dipole moment induced in a 
hydrogen atom by a uniform electric field, and then find the polarizability. Show 
that the polarizability, electric field strength, and energy change are related by Eq. 
(33.8). 

13. A hydrogen atom is placed in an electrostatic potential that has quadrupole 
symmetry. Make use of Eq. (33.21) to calculate the ratio of the strength of the total 
quadrupole potential in the infinitesimal neighborhood of the nucleus to the strength 
of the externally applied quadrupole potential. 

14. Denote ^, in Eq. (31.2) by |s). Show from Eqs. (31.4) and (31.6) that 

8 r 

&lt;«|ff'|r&gt; = X X W '+*»&lt;* ~ 9\r ~ V) 
9 = p = 

Use this formula to derive Eq. (33.17). (D. H. Smith, private communication.) 

15. Calculate the leading term in the third-order perturbed energy of a hydrogen 
atom and a point charge Ze at a fixed distance R, for large R. 

16. Show that the WKB approximation gives the correct energy eigenvalues for all 
states of the harmonic oscillator. 

17. Apply the WKB method to the one-dimensional motion of a particle of mass m 
in a potential that equals — V at x = 0, changes linearly with x until it vanishes at 
x = ±a, and is zero for |a:| &gt; a. Find all the bound energy levels obtained in this 
approximation if mV a*/A 2 = 40. 

18. Use the WKB approximation to show that an attractive three-dimensional poten- 
tial that falls off like r~ n for large r has an infinite number of bound states if n &lt; 2. 

19. A hydrogen atom in its ground state i3 placed between the plates of a capacitor. 
A voltage pulse is applied to the capacitor so as to produce a homogeneous electric 
field that has the time dependence E = f or t &lt; 0, E = Eoe~" T for t &gt; 0. Find the 
first-order probability that the atom is in the 2S state (200) after a long time. What 
is the corresponding probability that it is in each of the 2P states? 

20. Make use of Eq. (35.20) to calculate the total cross section for photoionization 
of a hydrogen atom by a photon of energy ha. Show that the photon wavelength is 
large in comparison with the size of the atom if the photon energy is not much above 
threshold, so that the assumption of a uniform electric field made in deriving (35.20) 
is appropriate to the photoionization problem. Show also that the effect of the mag- 
netic field of the light wave can be neglected in comparison with that of the electric 
field. 

21. Explain why Eq. (35.32) does not contain Ho and Hi in a symmetrical manner. 
Show also that HiU can be replaced by / H f (t) dt if H t depends on t, but only to 
first order. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS FOR BOUND STATES »* 

22. Show that the remark below Eq. (35.33) about the excitation of the nth state in 
the adiabatic approximation is correct. 

23. Show that the remark below Eq. (35.34) about the validity of the sudden approx- 
imation is correct. 

24. A hydrogen nucleus of mass 3 is radioactive and changes into a helium nucleus of 
mass 3 with the emission of an electron that has about 17,000 ev maximum energy. 
Show that the sudden approximation can be applied to the extranuclear electron 
initially present in the hydrogen atom and is superior to other approximation methods 
that might be used. Calculate the numerical values of the probabilities that the 
resulting helium ion is found in its IS, 2S, and IP states if the hydrogen atom is 
initially in its IS state. Give a qualitative discussion of the energy balance in this 
process. 



9 
Approximation Methods 
in Collision Theory 



As remarked at the beginning of Chap. 8, there are so few systems of 
physical interest for which exact solutions can be found that approxima- 
tion methods play an important part in applications of the theory. 
Various methods that are useful in scattering problems are considered 
in this chapter. We start with the development of the scattering matrix; 
this provides a more general framework, in terms of which collision prob- 
lems of all kinds may be discussed, than that of Chap. 5. Although not 
an approximation method in itself, it is a convenient starting point for 
perturbation and other approximations, some of which are considered 
later in this chapter. 

36DTHE SCATTERING MATRIX 

The collision theory developed in Chap. 5 assumed that the scattering 
potential energy is independent of the time and hence was able to make 
use of energy eigenf unctions. Equation (18.10) describes a situation in 
which the incident flux is represented by a plane wave of infinite cross 

298 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 2W 

section. As pointed out in connection with Fig. 21, this is not realistic 
since the incident beam is always collimated. However, collimation can 
be taken into account by superposing infinite plane waves that travel 
in slightly different directions; their angular spread in direction, measured 
in radians, is of the order of the ratio of the particle wavelength to the 
diameter of the collimating aperture. This angle is so small in practical 
cases that it does not affect the calculation of the scattering amplitude. 
Another way of describing the situation represented by Fig. 21 is to say 
that the propagation vector k has a definite magnitude k given in terms 
of the energy by E = h 2 k 2 /2n but that its transverse components k x and 
k y are very small in comparison with k ; then k z is practically equal to 
k, and the "wave packet" is well defined only in the two transverse 
directions. Since only a single energy E appears, the time-independent 
Schrodinger equation can be used. 

It will also happen that the time-independent model of a constant 
incident flux and a steady outgoing scattered wave is not appropriate in 
some circumstances. It certainly cannot be correct when the scattering 
potential energy V depends on the time, either intrinsically or because 
it may be convenient to think of V as being "turned on" at one time and 
"turned off" at a later time. Even when V is constant in time, it may 
be desirable to replace the incident plane wave with a moving wave 
packet that is rather well defined in all three spatial directions and gives 
rise to an outgoing spherical pulse as it passes over the scattering potential. 
Such a wave packet can be constructed by superposing time-dependent 
plane waves, in a manner similar to that discussed in the one-dimensional 
case at the end of Sees. 12 and 17. It then follows from Eq. (12.18) that 
the spread in each of the three components of k is of order l/R, where R 
is the size of the wave packet. The corresponding spread in the energy 
is of order E/kR; although this is very small compared with E in practical 
cases, the time-dependent Schrodinger equation must still be used. 1 

We start by deriving integral equations for the wave function and 
for the closely related Green's functions, and we then define the scattering 
matrix. This matrix describes the asymptotic behavior of the system in 
the sense that the spatial separation of the interacting parts is so large 
that interaction can be neglected, or the times are such that interaction 
has not yet occurred or is no longer occurring. Thus the scattering 
matrix describes the observable aspects of the scattering process. Since 
it is obtained by integrating the wave function through the space-time 
domain of interaction, it contains whatever information resides in the 
interaction that is relevant to scattering. At the same time, it shows 

1 For a fuller account of the wave-packet approach, see M. L. Goldberger and K. M. 
Watson, "Collision Theory," chap. 3 (Wiley, New York, 1964); R. G. Newton, 
"Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles," chap. 6 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966). 



300 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

what limitations are placed on possible scattering processes by the fact 
that the hamiltonian is physically meaningful or has certain symmetry 
properties. When derived from the Schrodinger equation, the scattering 
matrix evidently contains no more information than the hamiltonian. It 
can, however, also give useful results when the interactions that appear 
in the hamiltonian are not definitely known, as is the case in nuclear 
physics. 

GREEN'S FUNCTIONS AND PROPAGATOR 

Even though we shall not be working explicitly with moving wave 
packets, it is desirable to retain the generality inherent in the time- 
dependent situation for as long as possible. We therefore start with 
the full Schrodinger equation 

in j t f(r,t) - £T*(r,fl = [H + F(r,0]*(M) H = - |! V 

M (36.1) 

which describes the relative motion of two particles with reduced mass fi. 
Since Eq. (36.1) gives the first time derivative of ^ in terms of \p itself 
and since higher time derivatives do not appear in the equation, the 
values of \f/ for all r and one particular time t suffice to determine ^ for 
all r and all t (both earlier and later). Also, since the wave equation is 
linear in \f/, solutions can be superposed and the relation between ^ at 
different times must be linear. This means that ^ must satisfy a homo- 
geneous integral equation of the form 

*(r'/) = i$G(r',t'?,t)yl,(r,t) d 3 r (36.2) 

where the integration is over all space. This equation also serves to 
define G, which is called the Green's function that corresponds to the 
hamiltonian H. 

Equation (36.2) does not make a distinction between forward prop- 
agation of ^ in time {if &gt; i), and backward propagation {t' &lt; t). It is 
sometimes convenient to have a clear separation between these two 
cases. For forward propagation we define the retarded Green's function 
or propagator: 



G+{T',t';r,t) = G{t',t'?,t) for t' &gt; t 

= f or /' &lt; t 



(36.3) 



We also introduce the unit step function 6{t) defined by 

0(t) = 1 for t &gt; 0{t) = for r &lt; (36.4) 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 301 

Then the equation 

6(t' - t)+(j',t') = i$G + (r',t';TM(r,t) d*r (36.5) 

is the trivial identity = for t' &lt; t and is the same as (36.2) for t' &gt; t. 
For backward propagation in time we can similarly define the 
advanced Green's function: 

G-(r'/;r,0 = -G(t' ,? ;T,t) for t' &lt; t t 

v ' (36.6) 

= for t' &gt; t 

The equation 

6(t - t'W ,t') = -i7(?-(r'/;r,0*(r,0 dh (36.7) 

is again an identity for t' &gt; t and the same as (36.2) for t' &lt; t. Thus 
Eqs. (36.5) and (36.7) together are equivalent to Eq. (36.2). 

The following four integral relations involving G ± can be obtained 
from Eqs. (36.5) and (36.7) by making use of the fact that \f/ can be 
chosen arbitrarily at any instant of time (see Prob. 1) : 

G+(T',t';r,t) = ^(?+(r',f';riA)G + (ri,*i;r,0 d 3 ^ if t' &gt; h &gt; t 

G-{t',t';r,t) = -iJG-(t' ,t' ? l ,t x )G-(r u h;T J t) d*n \i t' &lt; h &lt; t 

5 3 (r - r') = J(?+(r',i;ri,&lt;i)G-(ri,fi;r,0 dh x if t&gt; h 

5 3 (r - r') = jG-iT'J-jiJJG+iT^rJ) d*n if t &lt; h 

(36.8) 

FREE-PARTICLE GREEN'S FUNCTIONS 

An explicit expression for the Green's function defined by Eq. (36.2) is 
readily found for the case in which V = 0. We denote it by Go', it is 
proportional to the bracket term in Eq. (10.19) in the free-particle case 
and may be evaluated in analogy with the solution of Prob. 8, Chap. 3. 
The result is 

e -C' "*&gt; ' ~ { [ssth^i] exp rn^j (36 - 9) 

The corresponding retarded Green's function, or free-particle propagator, 
is obtained from Eq. (36.3) : 

G + (T',t';T,t) = 6{t' - t)Go(T',t';r,t) (36.10) 

The advanced Green's function is similarly obtained from Eq. (36.6): 

G„-(r'/;r,0 = -6(t - t')Go(j',t';t,t) (36.11) 



302 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The validity of Eqs. (36.8) in the free-particle case can then be verified 
by direct substitution. 

It can also be seen from Eqs. (36.9) to (36.11) that there is a com- 
plex-conjugate relationship between Go + and Go - '. 

G Q +(r',t';r,t) = G&lt;r*(r,t;r',t') (36.12) 

We shall see below that this relationship also holds for G ± provided that 
V is real. 

INTEGRAL EQUATION FOR &lt;r 

We now obtain an iterated form of the integral equation (36.5) for &gt;p. 1 
We imagine that V is turned off except for a number of very short 
intervals of time between t and t' : from 1 1 to h + Ati, from t 2 to U + AU, 
etc., and finally from t n to t n + At„, where t' &gt; t n &gt; • • ■ &gt; h &gt; t. 
Then GV" may be used as the propagator from each U + Mi to U + i\ 

e(t i+1 - U — AU)\[s(r i+ i, t i+ i) 

= ijG Q +(r i+ i, t i+1 ; r.-, U + A^fo, U + AQ d*n (36.13) 

Propagation from U to U + AU involves both H and V. Since AU 
will later be regarded as an infinitesimal, the two changes in ^ may be 
added. The H part involves Go + and may be taken in with (36.13). 
The V part of the change in ^ is easily obtained from (36.1) and is 
— (i/k)V (Ti,ti)\f/(Ti,ti) Ak; this should be followed by free-particle propaga- 
tion from U + AU to t i+ i in accordance with (36.13), but the AU in the 
argument of Go + can be omitted since we are interested only in quantities 
of first order in At { . We thus obtain 

6(t i+ i - U)f (r i+ i, t i+1 ) 

= i f G +(T i+h ti +1 ;Ti,ti) J 1 - % - V(T i} ti) AtA +(Ti,ti) dht (36.14) 

The resultant propagation from t to t' then gives 

0(t' - t)+(r',t') = J ■ ■ ■ J iGo + (r',t';r n ,t n ) \l - \ V(r n ,t n ) At n ] 

iGo + (r n ,t n ?n-ht n -i) - - • iG + (r z,h? i,h) 1 - \ V('i,*i) Afi 

iG*+(T x M?M(?,t) d 3 r n • ■ • d 3 n d 3 r 
This may be multiplied out and simplified with the help of the first 

1 R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 76, 749 (1949); J. D. Bjorken and S. D. Drell, "Relati- 
vists Quantum Mechanics," sees. 6.2, 6.3 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1964). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 



303 



of Eqs. (36.8) : 

*(*' - fllKr',0 = i f G + (r',t' ;M)*(r,0 d 3 r 

i 

+ h 2 /// G wf*&amp;)yfrA)to&amp;* + (*i,u?i,ti) 

VfatdAyGo+iTj&amp;pMM d'r t d 3 r,- d 3 r + • • • 

where £,• &gt; tj in the third term, etc. If now the time intervals AU during 
which V is turned on become more frequent and of shorter duration until 
V is on continuously, the summations may be replaced by integrations: 

6(f - t)f(t',t') = i f G„+(r'/;r,OiKr,0 d 3 r 

+ lf dU ff GoHT'fpiMViTitiGo+fatipMfat) d 3 n d 3 r 

+ ±f dU f dt, fff GoHr'/KUmr^dGoHriA^tj) 

V(Xj,ti)G + (r i ,t i ?[,t)^(T,t) d'rtd'r,- d 3 r + • • • (36.15) 

Note that all integrations over times may be taken from t to t ' ; it is not 
necessary to require that U &gt; tj in the third term, for example, since 
Go + (Ti,ti;r } ;tj) vanishes unless this is so. 



Time A 




Time A 




Ga + (ri,U;r,t) 



(a) 

Fig. 33 Schematic representation of the first term (a) and second term (b) 
on the right side of Eq. (36.15). 



304 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It is natural to interpret Eq. (36.15) as a perturbation series, the 
first two terms of which are indicated schematically in Fig. 33. The 
first term on the right side represents the amplitude corresponding to 
free propagation from t to t' (Fig. 33a), the second the sum of all single 
interactions at U with free propagation from t to U and from U to t' (Fig. 
336), etc. We rewrite Eq. (36.15) for convenience as 

d(t' - fl*(r',0 = i / GV-(r'/;r,fl*(r,fl dh 

+ \l dti I Go+Or'/ *,*.•) ^(r.-,*) | * / G + (Ti,ti?,t)iKr,t) d 3 r 

+ \ I dti If G^&amp;PhtiVMGt+iti&amp;fMM d 3 rj d'r 

+ • • -ld 3 r&lt; 

If the series in brackets is assumed to converge, then in accordance with 
Eq. (36.15) it is equal to d{U - t)yp(Ti,t t ) or simply to ^(r*,0 since U &gt; t. 
We thus obtain an integral equation for ^ that, unlike (36.5), involves 
only Go + and not G + : 

0(t' - t)+(t',t') = * / G + (r',t';r,t)+(r,t) d*r 

+ \I dti I Go+ ^'^ *' fc ) V &lt;?&lt;&amp;)+&amp;&amp;) d'n (36. 16) 
The integration over U is from t to t' . 

INTEGRAL EQUATION FOR THE PROPAGATOR 

Comparison of Eqs. (36.5) and (36.15) shows that 
G+(r',t';t,t) = G + (r',t';r,t) 

+ \j\ G o+(r', t' ? it U) VfaUWfati ?,t) dk d*n 

+ ± ffff ^o + (r',&lt;';r i ,OF(r i ,0(7o + (r i ,^;ry,^) 

V{r i ,t 1 )G +{T j ,t i ;T,t)dt i dh i dtjd i r j + • ■ • (36.17) 

Again, if this series is assumed to converge, it may be summed to give 
the equation 

G+(r',t';r,t) = G +(T f ,t';T,t) 

+ \ ff GoHT f ,t'? i ,t i )V(T i ,t i )G+(T i ,t i ?,t) dU d* ri (36.18) 

USE OF THE ADVANCED GREEN'S FUNCTION 

The results of the two preceding subsections can be cast in terms of 
advanced rather than retarded Green's functions and are given here for 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 305 

completeness even though they are not as useful as the propagator equa- 
tions obtained above. 

We now have that t' &lt; t and therefore we start by imagining that 
V is turned off except for the intervals from t„ — At n to t n , from 
t n -i — At»-i to t n -i, etc., and finally from h — Mi to h, where 
t' &lt; t n &lt; • • • &lt; h &lt; t. Then the basic equation (36.14) for forward 
propagation is replaced by the following equation for backward propaga- 
tion in time: 

e(k - t i+ i)f(Ti + i,t i+ i) 

= -i j G -(r i+1 ,t i+ i?iA) U + | V(x it ti) Afc"U(r.-,fc) d*r t (36.19) 

As compared with (36.14), the minus sign in front of the right side of 
(36.19) arises from the minus sign in (36.6) or (36.7), and the plus sign 
in the brackets appears because the change in \f/ is calculated from U to 
U — AU rather than from U to U + Af t . 

It is now apparent that Eqs. (36.15) and (36.16) can be rewritten 
correctly by making the following substitutions : 

6(t' - t) -* 6(t - t') G + (t',t';T,t) -&gt; G&lt;r(r , ,t':T,t) i -► -i 

(36.20) 

In similar fashion, Eqs. (36.17) and (36.18) may be rewritten correctly by 
making the substitutions: 

(?o+(r'/;r,0 -► G&lt;r{t',t'?,t) G+{t',t'jc,t) -► G-{r' } t';t,t) (36.21) 

In all the rewritten equations, all time integrations are from t' to t. 

Equation (36.17), which expresses G + in terms of (? + , and the corre- 
sponding rewritten equation, which expresses G~ in terms of Go~, can now 
be used, with the help of (36.12), to show that 

G+(t',t'?,t) = G-*(T,t?',t) (36.22) 

provided that V is real. 

DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION FOR THE GREEN'S FUNCTIONS 

Thus far we have used the differential equation (36.1) for \f/ to construct 
the integral equations (36.2), (36.15), and (36.16) for ^, and the corre- 
sponding integral equations (36.17) and (36.18) for G ± . The Green's 
functions also satisfy a differential equation analogous to (36.1); this 
equation is expected to be inhomogeneous since G ± (t' t t'y[,t) is, in effect, 
the wave function at r', t' that is generated by a momentary point source 
at r, t. 

We can find this equation for G + by operating on Eq. (36.5) with 



306 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

i(d/dt') — (l/h)H', where H' is H expressed in terms of the primed varia- 
bles r', t' . It is necessary to make use of the relation 

£ 6(r) = «(r) (36.23) 

which follows from (36.4). The result is 

i8(t' - mx',t') = i f (i^ f - ^^G+(r',f';r,0^(r,0 d«r 

where use has been made of Eq. (36.1). This equation shows that the 
right side must be proportional to 8(t' — t),so that only \l/(r,t') can appear 
in the integrand of the right side. But since ${t,t') can be an arbitrary 
function of r at any particular time t', the rest of the integrand of the 
right side must be proportional to 5 3 (r' — r). We thus conclude that 



(4-H 



G+(r',t';t,t) = 5 3 (r' - *) *(*' - (36.24) 



It is easily seen that, if in the preceding paragraph we had started 
with Eq. (36.7), we would have found that G~ also satisfies (36.24). Thus 
G + and G~ satisfy the same inhomogeneous differential equation but of 
course differ in their boundary conditions. G + {i',t';T,t) is the solution of 
Eq. (36.24) that is zero for t' &lt; t, and G~ {t' ,t' ;t ,t) is the solution that is 
zero for t' &gt; t. 

SYMBOLIC RELATIONS 

The integral and differential equations for the Green's functions, obtained 
in the three preceding subsections, can be written in a symbolic form that 
is instructive. Equation (36.17) and the corresponding equation for G~ 
may be written 

G± = (? ± + h-iGo±VGo± + h- 2 Go ± VGo ± VG ± + • • ■ (36.25) 

In similar fashion, we may write Eq. (36.18) in the form 

G± = Go± + h-'Go^G* (36.26) 

Again, the differential equation (36.24) and the corresponding equation 
for G~ may be written 

(•s-J*) *- 1 (3a27) 

where the primes have been dropped. On omitting the V term in H, we 
obtain in place of Eq. (36.27) 



(4-H 



G ± = 1 (36.28) 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 307 

Various checks can be made on the consistency of the last four 
equations. If we symbolically multiply both sides of Eq. (36.26) from 
the left with i(d/dt) — (l/h)Ho, we obtain 



(4 - H^ = M -l Ho ) Go± (' + k VG± ) 



1 + r VG* 
n 



where use has been made of (36.28); the result agrees with (36.27). As 
another consistency check, Eq. (36.26) may be written as 

(1 - h-*G^V)G± = (?o ± 
or as 

(?± = (1 - h-Wo^V^Go* (36.29) 

A formal expansion of the inverse operator into a power series gives 



(?± = (1 + tr*G^V + hr*G ±VG ±V + 



•)G 



which is the same as (36.25). This successful use of an inverse operator 
suggests that Eqs. (36.27) and (36.28) may be written symbolically as 

^-(vl-i*)" 1 and ^-(4-s*)~ l 

(36.30) 
respectively. 

Although such symbolic manipulations are often of heuristic value 
in suggesting new relationships, they cannot always be regarded as deriva- 
tions or proofs of such relations. In particular, inverse operators of the 
type that appear in Eqs. (36.29) and (36.30) are often singular, and 
special care must be taken in the interpretation of the singularity. As 
an example of this, we note that both the retarded and advanced Green's 
functions are given by the same symbolic expressions in (36.30). We 
shall see in Sec. 37 that a suitable treatment of the singularity in the 
inverse operator serves to provide the boundary condition that dis- 
tinguishes between forward and backward propagation in time. 

APPLICATION TO SCATTERING 

The formalism developed thus far can now be applied to a scattering 
situation. We imagine that V is not effective in the remote past or the 
far future, so that H can be replaced by H for t &lt; — 7\ and t &gt; T 2 , 
where 7\ and T z are large but finite times. This may be because V was 
turned on at one time and turned off at a later time or because the initial 
and final states consist of wave packets that lie outside of the scattering 
potential. We call the free-particle wave functions &lt;t&gt; a (T,t); they satisfy 
Eq. (36.1) with V set equal to zero. The &lt;f&gt; a constitute a complete set of 



308 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

functions at each instant of time and are, for convenience, chosen to be 
orthonormal; it is shown in Prob. 3 that orthogonality is preserved in 
time. Associated with each 4&gt; a is a wave function ^ a +(r,0 that grows out 
of &lt;j&gt; a starting from a time in the remote past (t &lt; —Ti) before V was 
effective. Since \f/ a + satisfies Eq. (36.1), it can be written, in accordance 
with Eq. (36.5), in the form 

ik+W) = ijG+(T , ,t';r,i)&lt;f&gt; a (T,t) d 3 r t &lt; -T x (36.31) 

where 6(t' — t) may now be omitted. This ^„ + is independent of the 
precise value chosen for t so long as it is less than — T\. 

At some time in the far future (t &gt; T 2 ), when V is again ineffective, 
\[/ a + is a solution of the free-particle Schrodinger equation and hence must 
be expressible as a generalized summation over the fo with constant 
coefficients. Then the quantity 

(P\S\a) = (*„,*„+) H &gt; T 2 (36.32) 

is the amplitude of the free-particle state that is contained, after the 
scattering has taken place, in the state that grew out of what was the free- 
particle state a before the scattering took place. Again, it is independent 
of the precise value chosen for t' so long as it is greater than T 2 . Equation 
(36.32) is the amplitude for the transition from a to |3 and defines an ele- 
ment of the scattering matrix or S matrix. 1 

Substitution of (36.31) into (36.32) gives a more symmetrical form 
for the S matrix element : 

&lt;0|iS|a&gt; = ifj&lt;l&gt;$(T f ,t')G+(T , ,t'?,t)&lt;l&gt;a(T,t)d*r'd 3 r 

t &lt; -Ti t' &gt; T 2 (36.33) 

Other forms can be obtained by making use of the following equation, 
which can be obtained from the complex conjugate of the free-particle 
version of Eq. (36.7) together with (36.12): 

d(t - 0&lt;t&gt;$(T',t') - t/(^*(r' &gt; f ?r,0*?(r,0 d*r 

= if&lt;f&gt;$(T,t)G +(T,t?',t') d*r (36.34) 

Thus substitution of G+ from (36.17) into (36.33), and use of (36.5) and 
(36.34), lead to 

(fi\S\a) = 0\a) -\\\ +;(T,t)VM**M dt d ' r 

- p //// &lt;t&gt;$(T',t')V(T',t')G&lt;&gt;+(T',1??,t)V{T,t)&lt;l&gt;«(T,t) dt' dV dt d*r 

- • •• (36.35) 

1 J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 52, 1107 (1937); W. Heisenberg, Z. Naturforsch. 1, 608 
(1946); C. M0ller, Kgl. Danske Videnskab. Selshab, McU.-Fys. Medd. 23, 1 (1948). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 3» 

where &lt;/3|a) = /^|(r,0&lt;^«(r,0 d 3 r and is independent of t. Similar substi- 
tution of G + from Eq. (36.18) gives 

(fi\S\a) = &lt;/S|a&gt; - |jy &lt;j&gt;Z(r,t)V(T,t)+« + (T,t) dt d*r (36.36) 

Each of the time integrations in Eqs. (36.35) and (36.36) extends at least 
from — T x to T 2 and thus includes the entire interval during which V is 
effective. 

Expressions for the S matrix element similar to the above can be 
obtained by using the advanced Green's functions G ~ and G~. For 
example, associated with each fo there is a wave function ^~(r,0 that 
grows into &lt;j&gt;p at some time in the far future (t &gt; T 2 ) after V has ceased to 
be effective. It may be written, by using Eq. (36.7) with primed and 
unprimed variables interchanged, in the form 

^-(r,0 = -iSG-(j,t;r', ?)&lt;*&gt;(&gt;(*',?) d*r' t' &gt; T 2 (36.37) 

We might then expect that the S matrix element for the transition from 
a to j8 is given by the inner product of \f/f and &lt;t&gt; a evaluated at a time in 
the remote past (t &lt; — Ti) : 

(h~,&lt;t&gt;«) = inG-*(T,t;T',t')&lt;t&gt;Z(r',t')&lt;l&gt; a (T,t) dV d*r 

t&lt;-T x t' &gt; T 2 (36.38) 

Equation (36.22) shows that (36.38) is indeed the same as (P\S\a) given by 
(36.33), provided that H is hermitian or V is real. The discrepancy when 
V is complex is physically plausible, since we saw in Eq. (20.2) that an 
absorptive potential (imaginary part of V negative) causes the total 
probability associated with a state to decrease as time increases. This 
means that \f/ a + (T',t') is generally smaller for t' &gt; T 2 than the 4&gt; a out of 
which it grows, whereas ^f{T,t) is generally larger for t &lt; — 7\ than the 
4&gt;p into which it grows. Thus (36.38) is expected to be larger than (36.32) 
if V is absorptive. 

UNITARITY OF THE S MATRIX 

An important property of the S matrix is that it is unitary if the hamilton- 
ian is hermitian. In order to prove this, we must show that SS f = 1 and 
that S f S = 1. Any of the forms for (j8j&lt;S|a) obtained above, or the corre- 
sponding expressions containing advanced Green's functions or wave 
functions, can be used for this purpose. With the form (36.33), a typical 
matrix element of SS f is 

mS&amp;\a) - StWItXtIW - S T &lt;/8|%&gt;&lt;«|%&gt;* 
= S y H&lt;t&gt;t{r',t')G+(r',t';T,t)&lt;t&gt;y(T,t) d*r' d«r 

U *«(*", t , )G + *(?"&gt;t'? , ",0&lt;t&gt;*(*'"&gt; t ) d 3 r" d*r"' 

t &lt; -T x t' &gt; T 2 



310 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

It is convenient to use the same times t and t' in the matrix elements of 
both S and £ f , and it is permissible since (36.33) is independent of these 
times so long as V is not effective. Then since the &lt;j&gt;'s are complete and 
orthonormal, the summation over 7 introduces 5 3 (r — r'") in place of 
&lt;t&gt; y &lt;l&gt;*, and we have 

(fi\SS*\a) = ff!&lt;t&gt;Z(T',t')G+(T',t'-,T,t)G-(i,t-r",t')&lt;i&gt; a (T",n dVd»rdV 

where use has been made of Eq. (36.22). The third of Eqs. (36.8) then 
shows that the integral of the product of the two Green's functions over 
d-V gives 5 3 (r' - r"), so that the right side is simply (0\a). That S*S = 1 
is proved in similar fashion. 1 

SYMMETRY PROPERTIES OF THE -S MATRIX 

It is expected that the S matrix will possess symmetries that reflect the 
symmetries of the underlying hamiltonian. In order to see that this is 
the case, we consider first one of the symmetry operations discussed in 
Chap. 7 that can be represented by a unitary operator (space or time dis- 
placement, rotation, or space inversion). Any such operator U will 
transform a free-particle state &lt;j&gt;p into another state 4&gt;n' == Ufa that 
represents a possible free motion of the system, since U commutes with 
H . If in addition U commutes with H, it will transform \f/ a + into a state 
\{/a' + = U\f/ a + that also represents a possible motion of the system in the 
presence of the interaction V. Thus the S matrix element between trans- 
formed states, given by Eq. (36.32), is 

&lt;p\S\a?) = (^ ,*«'+) = (U^UiS) 

= (fc,tftw) = (&lt;/&gt;^« + ) - &lt;/3|S|«&gt; (36.39) 

all evaluated for t' &gt; TV For example, the amplitude for scattering 
between any pair of states caused by a spherically symmetric potential is 
numerically equal to the amplitude for scattering between those states 

1 The proof given here for the unitarity of S is satisfactory since V is turned on and 
off at finite times in the past and future. The situation is more complicated if V is 
strictly constant in time, and it becomes ineffective in the remote past and far future 
because the initial and final states consist of wave packets that lie outside the range 
of V. One complicating factor is that H may possess bound states, and it can then 
be shown that the wave-packet states are orthogonal to these bound states and hence 
do not form a complete set. Nevertheless, S is still unitary if V is real, since energy 
conservation prevents the bound states from becoming occupied. For further dis- 
cussion, see C. M0ller, loc. cit.; F. E. Low, in "Lecture Notes of Brandeis University 
1959 Summer Institute in Theoretical Physics"; W. Brenig and R. Haag, Fortschr. 
Physik 7, 183 (1959), Sec. 1, English translation published in M. Ross (ed.), "Quantum 
Scattering Theory," (Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Ind., 1963); Goldberger 
and Watson, loc. cit.; Newton, loc. cit. 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 311 

that are obtained by rotating the two members of the original pair in the 
same way. 

The left side of Eq. (36.39) may also be written &lt;/3| WSU\a). Then 
since the kets \a) and |j8&gt; are arbitrary, we conclude that 

WSU = S or [U,S] = (36.40) 

Thus if U commutes with H, it also commutes with the operator S. 

For the antiunitary operation of time reversal, discussed in Sec. 29, 
the situation is somewhat more complicated. The time-reversal operator 
T transforms a free-particle state 4&gt;p into another state that corresponds to 
reversed linear and angular momenta; we therefore denote it schematically 
by &lt;t&gt;-#. However, in accordance with the discussion of Eq. (29.12), 
operation with T also reverses the sense of progression of time, so that 

T* (t) = *-*(-*) (36.41) 

For example, if &lt;fo(0 = C exp i(fo • r — apt) for a spinless particle, then 
Eqs. (36.41) and (29.13) tell us that &lt;t&gt;-^{t) = C* exp i(-kp • r - upt), as 
expected. 

Suppose now that T commutes with H, so that the interacting 
system is time-reversal invariant. The simplest situation is that in which 
V is constant in time except for being turned on and off in a symmetrical 
manner at t = ± T - Then T will transform ^ a + into a state that also 
represents a possible motion of the system. This state will not only have 
reversed linear and angular momenta but will also grow into &lt;/&gt;_« in the far 
future rather than growing out of &lt;f&gt;- a from the remote past; we therefore 
denote it by ^C,. Again, operation with T reverses the sense of progres- 
sion of time, so that the analog of (36.41) is 

T+ a +(t) - rfcC-fl (36.42) 

For a system that is time-reversal invariant, so that H is hermitian 
or V is real, the discussion of Eq. (36.38) shows that an S matrix element 
can be written in the form 

(-a\S\-fi) = (*^(fl,*H&gt;(0)«&lt;-r. = (^(-O,0H»(-O)*&gt;r. 

We now substitute into this from (36.41) and (36.42) and make use of 
Eq. (29.13): 

&lt;-a|S|-0&gt; - (ZV„+0),rfc(O) = (UK* m +(!),UK*,(]L)) 

= (W(0,*fc(fl) = (fc(0,*. + (0) 

= (P\S\a) (36.43) 

all evaluated for t &gt; T . Equation (36.43) shows that the amplitude for 
scattering from an initial state a to a final state j8 is numerically equal to 



312 QUANTUM' MECHANICS 

the amplitude for scattering from the momentum-reversed final state — /3 
to the momentum-reversed initial state — a, if the system is time-reversal 
invariant. This is the reciprocity theorem [Eq. (20.16)] which was shown 
in Sec. 20 to be valid even when V is complex. 



37DSTATIONARY COLLISION THEORY 

The S matrix theory developed in the preceding section includes the 
possibility of an arbitrary variation of H with time, subject only to the 
restriction that free-particle states can be defined for finite times in the 
remote past and the far future. Although it is interesting to have such a 
comprehensive formalism available in order to show that any scattering 
problem can be formulated in principle, useful results are generally obtain- 
able only in special cases. The situation of greatest physical interest is 
that in which V is independent of the time, except for being turned on at 
one time and off at a later time. 

We first consider this stationary situation by imagining that V is 
effective for a very long but finite time to- A particular S matrix element 
can then be related to a transition probability per unit time, in much the 
same way as in the time-dependent perturbation theory developed in Sec. 
35, although without the restriction to the case in which V is a small 
perturbation. We then go a step further and relate this transition proba- 
bility to a scattering cross section. Following this we develop an alter- 
native procedure for the limit in which t is infinite, so that the situation 
is strictly stationary. In this case it is not meaningful to think in terms 
of a transition probability; rather, we shall obtain the scattering amplitude 
and cross section directly. 

TRANSITION MATRIX 

The initial and final free-particle states &lt;f&gt; a and fa, in terms of which the S 
matrix element (/3|$|a) is specified, can be chosen to have well-defined 
energies. We shall suppose that the times during which V is being turned 
on and being turned off are of order At and that, in between, V is constant 
for a time t that is much longer than At. This means that V(T,t) is 
replaced by V(T)g(t), where g(t) has the general form shown in Fig. 34. 
Then the time Fourier transform of Vg contains frequencies that lie in a 
range of order 1/M about zero. It follows from (36.36) that &lt;0| (S - 1) |a) 
is very small unless the energy associated with \f/ a + is in a range of order 
h/At about the energy associated with &lt;fo. We shall assume that At 
can be made large enough so that this energy range is experimentally 
unobservable. We shall also assume that 1 can be made so large in com- 
parison with At that the uncertainty in the effective on time of V is 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 



313 




*(0 




Fig. 34 Schematic plot of the function g(t) that determines the time 
dependence of V. 



unimportant. This means that V can be on for a well-defined time while 
energy is substantially conserved during the scattering process. 
With this physical situation in mind, we put 



(37.1) 



*«(r,fl = w«(r)e--«' (H - E a )u a (t) = 

*« + (r,0 = xa+tfe- 4 "" 1 (H - E a ) X a + (t) = 

where E a = hu&gt;« and V{t,t) can be replaced by V(t)g(t). We then make 
use of Eq. (36.36) to define an element of the transition matrix or T 
matrix through 



&lt;|8|(5 - l)|a&gt; = - I &lt;p\T\a) J~ m git)*** dt 
(fi\T\a)m f u2(i)V(i)x« + (t) d&gt;r 



(37.2) 



W0a = Up — O a 



TRANSITION PROBABILITY 

The definition of the scattering matrix [Eq. (36.32)] shows that |&lt;/3|&lt;S|a&gt;| 2 
is the probability that a system originally in the state a is finally found to 
be in the state (3. So long as a and /3 are different states, this is equal to 
|(j8|0S — l)|a)| 2 , and we can use Eq. (37.2) to calculate the transition 
probability. If now we were to assume that A£ = in Fig. 34, the situa- 
tion would be similar to that described in connection with Eq. (35.12) and 
Fig. 31. In order to avoid this, we shall not assume such a square form 
for 0(0. 

The initial and final states in a scattering problem are continuously 
distributed, or nearly so if box normalization is used. Thus there is 
always a group of final states j8 that have nearly the same energy and for 
which (P\T\a) is roughly independent of 0. Such a group of states will 
also have nearly the same values for all the other parameters, besides the 
energy, that specify the states. For example, if the final states are 
momentum eigenfunctions, the states will be characterized by a small 



3M QUANTUM MECHANICS 

range of direction of the momentum vector as well as of its magnitude. 
We write the number of these states as p(0) dEp, where dEp is the energy 
range and p(fi) is evidently a differential in the other parameters. Then 
the total probability of finding the system in one or another of this group 
of final states is a summation of |(/3|(£ — l)|a)| 2 : 

f \&lt;P\(S - l)\a)\*p(fi) dE, 

= ft" 2 / |(0| T|a&gt;| 2 | f" a gWfia* dt | 2 p(0)h do,, 

where we have replaced dEp by h dc&gt;}p a since &lt;*&gt; a is constant. Now the 
Fourier transform of git) is strongly peaked at up a = 0, so that we can 
remove p(fi)\(P\T\a)\ 2 from inside the integral over up tt and extend the 
limits to + oo . Then 

f K If" git)****' dt\* due, = 2x I" \g(t)\*dt 

and this is essentially equal to 2irt if g{t) has the form shown in Fig. 34. 
The transition probability per unit time is then given by 

w ^ 1 1 miS ~ DI^IW) dE &lt;&gt; = %p(P)MT\a)\* (37.3) 

Equation (37.3) is exact. Comparison of the second term on the 
right side of Eq. (36.35) with the corresponding term of (36.36) shows 
that a perturbation approximation to (37.3) is obtained by replacing x« + 
by u a in (37.2). This replacement gives Fermi's "Golden Rule No. 2." 1 

SCATTERING CROSS SECTION 

An expression for the differential scattering cross section is most con- 
veniently obtained from Eq. (37.3) by using box normalization. We 
choose the u$ to be the momentum eigenfunctions 

u$(t) = Lr* exp (ik • r) 

in which case p(/3) is given by Eq. (35.18) : 

P(fi) =g^A*dty (37.4) 

where dSl$ is the infinitesimal element of solid angle associated with the 
direction of k^. 

The value of w obtained by substitution of (37.4) into (37.3) is the 
number of scatterings into dQp per unit time when there is initially one 
system in the volume L 3 . This is an incident flux of v a /L 3 per unit area 

1 E. Fermi, "Nuclear Physics," p. 142 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1950); 
see also Eq. (35.14). 



(T( 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 315 

and time, where v a is the relative initial speed. Since the differential 
scattering cross section is denned as the scattering per unit incident flux, 
we have 

w 

so that 

where we have replaced A^ by iiVp/h. In the case of elastic scattering now 
under consideration, energy is conserved and v p = v a . 

The wave functions u$ and x&lt;* + that appear in the T matrix element 
(37.2) are each normalized to one system in the volume L 3 , so that 
&lt;/8|T|a) is proportional to 1/L 3 . Thus the differential cross section is 
independent of L, as of course it must be. It is also worth noting that 
the total transition probability wt , where w is given by (37.3), is propor- 
tional to t /L z . Since the use of box normalization implies that the limit 
£, _ » oo will ultimately be taken, the apparent difficulty associated with 
the fact that the probability wt can be greater than unity if t is made 
sufficiently large does not in fact arise. This probability actually becomes 
vanishingly small for any finite value of 1 as L — &gt; « . 

GREEN'S FUNCTIONS FOR STATIONARY CASE 

We now develop an alternative procedure that is applicable in the limit in 
which t is infinite, so that the situation is strictly stationary and energy is 
strictly conserved. It is necessary to assume that the S-matrix formalism 
developed in Sec. 36 remains valid in this limit; this can be shown along 
the lines of the wave-packet approach referred to in the footnote near the 
end of that section. We cannot now think in terms of a transition proba- 
bility per unit time but instead obtain the scattering amplitude and cross 
section directly. This strictly stationary situation is most easily and 
most directly approached by starting with the time-independent 
Schrodinger equation. Although we shall follow this procedure a little 
later, we first devote this and the next subsection to a treatment that 
starts from the time-dependent Green's functions already discussed in 
Sec. 36. 

An explicit expression for the Green's function G{x',t';t,t), defined in 
Eq. (36.2.), is easily obtained from Eq. (10.19) in the stationary case. In 
our present notation it is 

G(T',t';r,t) = -i$aX«(r')Xa*(r)e--«&lt;&lt;'-'&gt; (37.6) 

where the x« constitute a complete orthonormal set of solutions of the 
time-independent Schrodinger equation (H — E a )x a = 0. The fact that 



316 QUANTUM MECHANtCS 

G is a function only of t' — t, and not of I' and t separately, is a conse- 
quence of the invariance of H with respect to time displacement in the 
stationary case. In accordance with (36.3), the propagator is obtained 
by multiplying this G by B(t' — t) . Since the form (37.6) for G resembles 
a Fourier expansion in the time difference t' — t, the possibility of separat- 
ing out the time dependence by expressing 6(t' — t) as a Fourier expansion 
suggests itself. We now show that this has the form 

6(t) = lim - -L Z" 00 e-^-^-j (37.7) 

We note first that the derivative of this with respect to r is 

Ztt J - =» 

which in accordance with Eq. (11.10) is equal to 8(t), as expected from 
Eq. (36.23). This result is independent of whether the denominator of 
the integrand in (37.7) is chosen to be « + ie or w — ie, that is, whether 
the pole in the integrand is below or above the contour of integration, 
which is along the real axis. However, the two choices give different 
values for the integral. The first choice corresponds to a pole at — ie as 
shown in Fig. 35a. For r &lt; 0, this contour may be completed with an 
infinite semicircle in the positive imaginary half plane, as in Fig. 356, 
since the exponential becomes vanishingly small there and contributes 
nothing to the integral; then 0(t) = 0. For t &gt; 0, the contour may be 
completed as in Fig. 35c, and the integral is equal to — 2iri times the 
residue of the integrand at the only pole (w = — ie) that lies within the 
contour. Then, in the limit e — &gt; 0+ 0(t) = 1. It is easily verified that 
the second choice for the denominator, co — ie, leads to 0(t) — 1 instead 
of to Eq. (36.4). 

We now combine Eqs. (37.6) and (37.7) to obtain an expression for 
G + (T',t';r,t). It is convenient to change the variable of integration from 
a to w + w a and to write G + in the form of a Fourier analysis : 

G+(r'/;r,0 = ^ [" (7.+(r' l r)«H-(«'-«) d* 

**}-*&gt; (37.8) 

(?„ + (r',r) = S.(« - «. + ^-^(rOx^r) 

where the limit e — &gt; 0+ is always implied. It is easily established that the 
advanced Green's functions G~{t',t';T,t) and (^-(r'jr) are related to each 
other by the first of Eqs. (37.8) and that G u ~ is given by the second equa- 
tion with -Me replaced by —ie in the denominator of the summand. In 
analogy with Eq. (36.24), it can also be shown from the completeness and 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 



317 



Complex 
w plane 



Imaginary 
axis 



Real 
axis 



(a) 




(c) 



Fig. 35 Contours for the integration of Eq. (37.7). 



orthonormality of the x&lt;* that G^ satisfies the equation 

L-itf'W^r) = 5'(r'-r) 
where H' is H expressed in terms of r'. 



(37.9) 



GREEN'S FUNCTIONS AS INVERSE OPERATORS 

We are now in a position to see how the inverse operators (36.30) can be 
written explicitly. On restoring the primes dropped just before (36.24), 
the first of Eqs. (36.30) becomes 



318 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

Here, the completeness relation of the x« has been used to substitute for 
5 3 (r' — r), and Eq. (11.10) has been used to substitute for 8(t' — t). A 
typical term of the summand-integrand, x&lt;*(i')e~ iat ', is an eigenf unction of 
the operator i(d/dt') — (l/h)H' with eigenvalue a&gt; — w a . We therefore 
try to replace any function of this operator, when operating on this typical 
term, by the same function of the eigenvalue. If this is done, we obtain 

G±(r',t';r,t) = ^ f S«(o&gt; - cO^x-COxMe^''- da&gt; 

This provides an example of the singularity mentioned below Eq. 
(36.30). The integral over co is not well defined unless the pole at w a is 
removed from the real axis. This may be accomplished by replacing 
w — co a by co — oj a + it in the denominator of the integrand, and this 
leads to the correct G ± as obtained in Eqs. (37.8). The insertion of ±u 
both removes the singularity and specifies whether the Green's function 
propagates forward or backward in time. 

STATIONARY PROPAGATOR 

The stationary Green's functions (r M ±(r',r) defined in (37.8), which are the 
Fourier transforms of the time-dependent Green's functions G ± (r',t';r,t), 
can also be obtained directly from the time-independent Schrodinger 
equation. For a stationary scattering problem, we are interested in a 
solution of this equation that has the asymptotic form of a plane plus 
outgoing scattered wave, as in Eq. (18.10). We expect this to be associ- 
ated with the propagator G u + rather than with G u ~, since \f/ a + (T,i) was 
defined in Eq. (36.31) to be the wave function that grows out of the free- 
particle wave function 0«(r,O starting from a time in the remote past 
before V was effective. In accordance with (37.1), we call this stationary 
solution x« + ( r ) an d write it as 

Xa + (r) = C[exp (tk„ • r) + t&gt;(r)] = w a (r) + Cv(x) (37.10) 

where u a (r) is the suitably normalized plane wave defined in (37.1). The 
coefficient C is equal to L~ } for box normalization and to (27r)~* for con- 
tinuum or 5-function normalization (see Sec. 11). Since the scattered 
wave associated with x« + is outgoing, the asymptotic form of i&gt;(r) may be 
written, in analogy with (18.10), as 

v(r) &gt;-/(k r ,k„)e*«' (37.11) 

r— &gt;oo f 

where the vector k r that appears in the scattering amplitude / has magni- 
tude k a and the direction of r. It is important to note that the coefficient 
C is the same for x« + and for u a , since v(i) contributes a negligible amount 
to the normalization integral. Further, this procedure is valid as well for 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 319 

complex V, since stationary scattering solutions (E a real) can always be 
found. 

Substitution of (37.10) into the wave equation 

[Ho + V(r) - E a ] Xa + (r) = 
shows that v(r) satisfies the inhomogeneous differential equation 

(Ho - E a )v(r) = - ^ ^(r)x* + (r) 

This equation is easily solved with the help of the free-particle version of 
Eq. (37.9), to give 

v(T f ) = (hC)- l fGt a (T',T)V(T) Xa +(T) d*r (37.12) 

Combination of (37.10) and (37.12) shows that x« + satisfies an inhomog- 
eneous equation, called the Lippmann-Schwinger equation 1 : 

Xa +(r') = u a (r') + h-ifGt a (r',T)V(i) X « + (T) d'r (37.13) 

By making use of the free-particle version of Eq. (37.9), we may write 
this symbolically as 

X« + = u a + (E a - Ho + ie)~ l V Xa + (37.14) 

Since Ho is hermitian, its eigenvalues are real, and the inverse operator is 
nonsingular so long as e is finite. 

Equation (37.13) can be iterated to give an infinite series for x« + : 

X« + (r') = w«(r') + h- l jGt a (r',T)V(T)u a (T) dh 
+ h-^jGt a (T , ,t i )V(T i )Gt a (T i ^V(T)u a (r)dh i dh+ ■ • • (37.15) 

Also, Eq. (37.14) can be manipulated symbolically to give 

X« + = u a + (E a - H + u)~ l Vu a (37.16) 

which can be written out in the form 

Xa + (r') = u a (T') + h-ifGt; a (T',T)V(T)u a (r) d*r (37.17) 

Equation (37.17) can also be derived without using symbolic relations. 

FREE-PARTICLE PROPAGATOR 

In order to make use of equations like (37.13), we need an explicit expres- 
sion for the free-particle propagator G 0a + (r',i) . For positive a&gt;, the second 

1 B. A. Lippmann and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 79, 469 (1950). 



320 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

of Eqs. (37.8) becomes 

GoJ-(r',r) = Sa(co - «« + u)-iu a (T')ut(t) 

= 4^ / (fc * ~ *** + " )_1 6XP [ika ' (r ' ~ r)] d3ka (37 ' 18) 

where k 2 == 2n&lt;a/h. Because of the space-displacement invariance of H , 
Go a + is a function only of r' — r and not of r' and r separately. Integra- 
tion over the angles of k with r' — r as polar axis gives 

Go. + (r',r) = ~- fj (k 2 - k a 2 + U)~ l k a sin k aP dk a 

where p = |r' — r|. The k a integral is most readily evaluated by extend- 
ing the lower limit to — « , writing sin k a p in exponential form, and using 
residues as in the evaluation of (37.7). The result is 

G«. + (r',r) = - ^ |r' - r|-* exp (tfc|r' - r|) a, &gt; 

*-+(^)' (37-19) 

For negative «, the only change is in the sign of i in the exponent, where 
now k = -\-(2n\o3\/h)K Thus, for both positive and negative co, substi- 
tution into the first of Eqs. (37.8) shows that G + is a superposition of 
waves that travel radially outward from r to r', in agreement with Eq. 
(36.10). 

SCATTERING AMPLITUDE 

The scattering amplitude /(k r ,k a ) can now be found by comparing the 
asymptotic form of (37.12) with (37.11). We note that r is essentially 
restricted to finite values since F(r) appears in the integrand of (37.12). 
Thus in the exponent of G% wa we have 



|r' — r| = r' — r cos 6 
and in the denominator 

|r' - rh 1 = r'- 1 + 



'-© 



where 8' is the angle between r' and r. Equation (37.19) then gives 



Gt„(r',r)^- ^ **■&lt;'—• " 



and substitution into (37.12) gives the asymptotic behavior 

y(r') &gt; - n * , e ik « r ' f e -'*«"&lt;&gt;° «T(r) X « + (r) d 3 r (37.20) 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 3a 

We now define a vector k p which, like the vector k r in Eq. (37.11), 
has magnitude k a and the direction of r', so that k a r cos 6' = kp • r. Com- 
parison of (37.11) and (37.20) then gives 

ffoM - - ^c / ex P &lt;-** * r ) F ( r )x« + W d 3 r 

- " 5SP|CP / «W«*- + « d3r 

where the T matrix element is defined in Eq. (37.2). Since, in accordance 
with (37.10), up and x&lt;» + both have asymptotic magnitude \C\, the scatter- 
ing amplitude is independent of the choice of C, as of course it must be. 
As shown in Eq. (18.11), the differential scattering cross section 
from the initial propagation vector k„ to the final propagation vector kp 
is equal to \f(kp,k a ) | 2 . Thus (37.21) is in agreement with (37.5) when box 
normalization is used. 

INGOING WAVES 

It is easily seen that Eqs. (37.13) to (37.19) can be rewritten correctly by 
making the following substitutions : 

x« + -&gt; x«~ G£Jr',r) - G^ a (t f ,r) i-&gt; -i (37.22) 

In analogy with (37.11), x«~" has the asymptotic form of a plane plus 
ingoing wave: 

x «-(r) &gt; C [exp iik a • r) + \f-&lt;Mti&lt;r*A (37.23) 

r— &gt;«o I T J 

Comparison of the original and rewritten equations then shows that if 
V is real 

X« + (r) = Xl2(r) /(k„k a ) = f-*(k T -k a ) (37.24) 

where xla is the time-reversed state to x« + and has the opposite momen- 
tum — k a . 

Still considering the case in which V is real, we can rewrite the T 
matrix element in terms of \p~. From Eqs. (37.2) and (37.16) we have 

&lt;0|7V&gt; = (Ufi,VXa + ) = (Ufi,VUa) + [up, V(E -H + U)- l Vua] 

= (up,Vu a ) + [(E - H - u)-Wufi, Vu a ] (37.25) 

where E = E a = Ep. The rewritten version of (37.16) is 
Xfi~ = up + (E - H - U)~ l Vup 



322 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

so that (37.25) becomes 

(fi\T\a) = (xfi-,Vua) Freal (37.26) 

It is sometimes useful to have available an expression similar to 
(37.26) when V is complex. We accordingly define wave functions 
Xa T± , which are stationary solutions of the Schrodinger equation with V 
replaced by V*: 

X« T± = u a + (E - Ho ± ie)- 1 V* x « T± 

= u a + (E - W ± ie)-W*u a (37 ' 27) 

X-a T ~ is the time-reversed state to x« + but does not represent a physically 
possible behavior of the system since H is not time-reversal invariant. 
Equation (37.26) then becomes 

(P\T\a) = (xe T -,Vu a ) V complex (37.28) 

S MATRIX FOR STATIONARY CASE 

An explicit expression for the S matrix element can be obtained by allow- 
ing the cutoffs on g(t) in Eq. (37.2) to extend to + oo : 

0|(S - l)|a&gt; = - ~S( U , - «.)0|r|a&gt; 

= - 2 ^Fj(h-k a )(fi\T\«) (37.29) 

where use has been made of the fifth of Eqs. (11.13). We also require an 
expression for (/3|a), which with continuum normalization is 

&lt;fi\a) = 6&gt;&lt;to - k.) = 'to- *«&gt; i^M ,(,, - *,) (37.30) 

where the weight functions appropriate for spherical coordinates have 
been included. We can now combine Eqs. (37.21), (37.29), and (37.30) 
with C = (27r)~*, to obtain the S matrix element: 

(37.31) 
Equation (37.31), together with the assumption that S is unitary, 
can be used to derive the optical theorem and the generalized optical 
theorem, discussed in Sec. 20. 

ANGULAR MOMENTUM REPRESENTATION 

The S matrix element (37.31) is expressed in terms of the polar coordi- 
nates of the initial and final propagation vectors : 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 323 

It can be transformed to the representation specified by the energy (or 
the magnitude of the propagation vector) and the angular momentum by 
making use of the unitary transformation matrix (27.29) : 

&lt;0+|2m) = Y lm (0,&lt;l&gt;) (37.32) 

We then have 

(kplpmp\S\kJ a m a ) 

= S t ^SB^ a (lpmp\0p^p){kp6p^p\S\k a a 4&gt;c){0 a 4&gt;a\lam a ) (37.33) 

The generalized summation symbols are angle integrations in this case 
and include the weight functions sin Op, sin a , as remarked after (27.29). 
Equation (37.33) takes a particularly simple form if V is spherically 
symmetric, since then, in accordance with Eq. (36.40), S commutes with 
the angular momentum operator. The scattering amplitude depends 
only on the angle 6 between k a and kp and may be written as in Eq. 
(19.11): 

/(k„,k„) - JL ^ (21 + l)(e 2 »' - 1)Pi(cob 0) (37.34) 

° i 

Here cos = cos Op cos a + sin Op sin a cos (&lt;t&gt;p — &lt;t&gt; a ), and, in accordance 
with Eqs. (32.10) and (14.16), 

P t (cos 0) = 2TJ7T J r *-&lt;'*fc&gt; F k&lt;'-'*"&gt; (37 - 35) 

m= —I 

Substitution of Eqs. (37.31), (37.32), (37.34), and (37.35) into (37.33) 
gives 

(kplpmp\S\kJ a m a ) 
8(kp — k a ) 



k a 



(Iff sin Op dOp-dfy sin a dO a d^&gt; a Yi 0m/j (Op,&lt;t&gt;p) 



■- ° l m= — I 

Yu^Q.AJ = e^K 8(kp ~ 2 ka) Si pla S mpma (37.36) 

where use has been made of the orthonormality of the spherical harmonics. 
Thus S is diagonal in the representation specified by the wave 
number k (or the energy) and the angular momentum quantum numbers 
I and m. This is to be expected since a static spherically symmetric 
potential does not change either the energy or the angular momentum 
during the scattering process. This representation of the S matrix is 



324 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

easily verified to be unitary provided that the phase shifts are real, as 
is the case when H is hermitian or V is real. It should also be noted, 
from the discussion of Sec. 19, that the radially incoming wave r~ x e~ ikr 
is not modified in the partial wave analysis, whereas the outgoing wave 
for a particular I is multiplied by e 2fS «. Thus each diagonal element of 
the scattering matrix has a natural interpretation as the modification of 
a particular outgoing or scattered partial wave as compared with the 
corresponding incoming or incident partial wave. 



38D APPROXIMATE CALCULATIONS 

In the preceding section, an exact relation between the scattering ampli- 
tude and the T matrix element [Eq. (37.21)] was derived. The T matrix 
element in turn is expressed in terms of the stationary outgoing solution 
X« + (r) through Eq. (37.2), and an infinite perturbation series (37.15) is 
available for the calculation of x« + - The first order of this perturbation 
series leads to the Born approximation, 1 which consists in replacing x« + 
by u a . We show first how this method can be applied in some interesting 
cases of potential scattering and then how it can be generalized to treat 
scattering by a system with internal degrees of freedom (electron-atom 
scattering). Finally, we discuss the eikonal approximation, which is 
closely related to the WKB approximation. 

BORN APPROXIMATION 

The procedure outlined in the preceding paragraph leads at once to the 
Born expression for the scattering amplitude: 

fsttoM = - 2^?fcp./ tf?(r)7(r)u.(r) &lt;Pr 

J V(t) exp (»q • r) d*r q = ka — k 

(38.1) 



A* 
2irh 2 



Thus the Born scattering amplitude is proportional to the spatial Fourier 
transform of the scattering potential with respect to q, where hq is the 
momentum transfer from the incident particle to the scattering potential 
during the collision. It is reminiscent of the time Fourier transform that 
appears in the perturbation expression for the transition amplitude [Eq. 
(35.9)]. If the potential V is spherically symmetric, Eq. (38.1) may be 
simplified by integrating over the angles of r with respect to q as polar 

1 M. Born, Z. Physik 38, 803 (1926). This method appears to have been first used by 
Lord Rayleigh, Phil. Mag. 12, 81 (1881); see also R. Gans, Ann. Physik 76, 29 (1925). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 325 

axis. In this case, f B depends only on the angle between k„ and k^: 
f B ( $ ) = -2* jj r s in qr V(r) dr q = 2k sin *0 (38.2) 

where k is the magnitude of k a and kp. 

An interesting example of the application of Eq. (38.2) is to the 
elastic scattering of an electron by a neutral atom that is represented by 
a simple form of screened coulomb potential: V(r) = — (Ze 2 /r)e- rla . 
This behaves like the nuclear coulomb potential for atomic number Z 
when r is small and falls off rapidly when r is large in comparison with 
the "radius" a of the atomic electron cloud that screens the nucleus. 
The Thomas-Fermi statistical theory of the atom (see Sec. 47) shows that, 
for moderately heavy atoms, a is roughly equal to h 2 /me 2 Z l , where m is 
the electron mass. Substitution of this potential into (38.2) gives 

The cross section |/b(0)| 2 is in agreement with the Rutherford result 
(21.11) when the momentum transfer is large enough so that 1/a 2 can be 
neglected in comparison with q 2 in the denominator. In the analogous 
classical situation, the incident electron passes close enough to the nucleus 
so that the atomic electrons are relatively ineffective in screening the 
nuclear potential. 

The total cross section is most easily evaluated by changing the 
variable of integration from 6 to q = 2k sin £0, in which case sin dd is 
replaced by q dq/k 2 : 

a = 2^ /; \f B (d)\ 2 sin d6 = ^ f Q 2k \Mq)\ 2 q dq 

= lforju 2 Z 2 e 4 a 4 
ft 4 (4fc 2 a 2 + 1) 

With the above Thomas-Fermi expression for a, and neglecting the differ- 
ence between m and n, the total cross section becomes ^irZ i /k 2 at high 
energies (ka » 1). This agrees in order of magnitude with the result of 
a numerical integration 1 of the scattering produced by the Thomas-Fermi 
potential. 

VALIDITY OF THE BORN APPROXIMATION 

Since the only approximation involved in the preceding subsection is the 
replacement of x&lt;* + by u a in the T matrix element, a convenient criterion 
for the validity of the Born approximation can be obtained by requiring 
that |t&gt;(r)| in Eq. (37.10) be small in comparison with |exp (ik a • r)| = 1. 

1 E. C. Bullard and H. S. W. Massey, Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 26, 556 (1930). 



326 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

We must use perturbation theory to estimate v(t), by making use of 
(37.12) and replacing x&lt;* + by u a in the integrand. It is then most con- 
venient to make this estimate at r = 0, and this should be satisfactory 
since it is likely that v(r) is largest at the center of the scattering potential. 
The resulting validity criterion is probably sufficient but may be more 
stringent than is actually required; for example, the small-angle scattering 
(small momentum transfer) may be given correctly by the Born approx- 
imation when the large-angle scattering is not. 
We obtain in this way 

v(0) « (hC)- 1 f G 0ua + (0,r)V(T)u a (r) dh 
= —Ti[" I e ikr V(r)e ikrw r dr dw 

= ~Wkfo°° (e2ikr ~ 1)F(r) dr &lt; 38 - 4 &gt; 

where w is the cosine of the angle between k a and r. With the screened 
coulomb potential substituted into (38.4), the condition |w(0)| &lt;3C 1 
becomes 



£„ / sin x e lx - xlka — 
n 2 k Jo x 



«1 



where x = kr replaces r as the variable of integration. For ka &lt;5C 1, 
this becomes 2nZe 2 a/h 2 &lt;&lt;C 1 which, with the earlier approximate expres- 
sion for a, is equivalent to Z l « 1 ; thus the Born approximation cannot 
be used for the scattering of slow electrons by atoms. For ka ^&gt; 1, the 
criterion becomes (Ze 2 /hv) In ka &lt;JC 1, and the approximation is useful for 
fast electrons so long as Z is not too large. It turns out that this last 
result is substantially unaffected by relativity theory; thus the Born 
approximation becomes poor for the heavier elements since v cannot 
exceed c, and e 2 /hc = y^-. 

SCATTERING FROM TWO POTENTIALS 

It is sometimes convenient to write the potential as the sum of two parts, 
V — Vi + Vz, and then to express the T matrix element as the sum of a 
part that would arise from V x alone and a correction term. 1 Such a 
procedure is useful if the wave equation for Vi by itself is exactly soluble 
and if V 2 is small enough so that it can be regarded as a perturbation. 
For example, Vi may be the coulomb interaction between an electron and 
a point nucleus of large Z, and V 2 the additional electrostatic interaction 

1 K. M. Watson, Phys. Rev. 88, 1163 (1952); M. Gell-Mann and M. L. Goldberger, 
Phys. Rev. 91, 398 (1953). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 327 

that arises because the nucleus is of finite size. As another example, Vi 
may be the strong, short-range nuclear interaction between two protons, 
for which only a small number of partial waves need be calculated, and 
F 2 the much weaker coulomb interaction. 

We note first that Eqs. (37.2), (37.28), (37.14), and (37.27) are, 
respectively, 

(P\T\a) = (ueJxS) = (xp T -,Vu a ) 

Xa + = « 8 +(£-i?o + it)- l V Xa + (38.5) 

Xfi*- = Ufi + (E - Ho - ie)- 1 V*x^ T - 
where E = E a = E &amp; . We may then substitute for up in the first of the 
expressions (38.5) for &lt;fi\T\a) by using the equation 



T- 



Xi/ _ = «* + (E - Ho - u^Vfxvt 
which describes the scattering from Vi alone. The result is 
(l3\T\a) = [u p , (Fi + F 2 ) X a + ] 

= [xv*-, (Yi + V 2 ) Xa + ] 

- [(E -Ho- ui-Wtxv*-, (Vi + V 2 ) Xa + ] 
= [xw T -, (Vi + V 2 ) Xa + ] 

- [xie T - Vi(E -Ho- ie)-HVi + F 2 ) X a + ] 

We now note that (E - H + u)- l (y x + V 2 )x a + is equal to X a + - u a , 
and that (xip T ~,ViU a ) is equal to (j8|Ti|a&gt;, the T matrix element that 
describes scattering by Vi alone. We thus obtain 

&amp;\T\a) = &lt;/8|r x |a&gt; + (Xi3 r - ^2X« + ) (38-6) 

which is exact. 

DISTORTED WAVE BORN APPROXIMATION 

Equation (38.6) is most useful when V 2 is small, in which case the second 
term is given to first order in V 2 by replacing x« + by xi« + - This gives the 
T matrix element in the distorted wave Born approximation (DWBA) i 1 

(fi\T\a) « &lt;/8|Ti|a&gt; + (xi^-,^2Xi« + ) (38.7) 

The form of Eq. (38.7) is reasonable insofar as it gives the correction 
term, (P\(T — Ti)\a), as a matrix element of the second potential between 
states that are distorted by the first potential. However, it may at first 
seem strange that this matrix element is to be calculated between an 
initial state that is asymptotically a plane plus an outgoing spherical 

1 N. F. Mott and H. S. W. Massey, "The Theory of Atomic Collisions," p. 100 (Oxford. 
New York, 1933). 



328 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



wave and a final state that is asymptotically a plane plus an ingoing 
spherical wave, rather than between two states of the outgoing type. 
This result can be made physically plausible in the following way. 1 

The calculation is intended to yield the probability amplitude for a 
transition in which V 2 causes scattering into the direction k^. However, 
if the final-state wave function were to be of the outgoing type, one would 
expect that a portion of this amplitude would be associated with scattering 
into directions other than k^, since all directions are included in the out- 
going spherical wave. In the same way, a portion of the probability 
amplitude for scattering in the direction kp would then be included in the 
calculations for other final-state directions, since their outgoing waves 
would include contributions to scattering in the direction k^. The only 
way to avoid this situation is to choose the final-state wave function 
in such a way that it contains no outgoing spherical wave; this is possible 
only if the wave function is asymptotically a plane plus an ingoing 
spherical wave. 

PARTIAL WAVE ANALYSIS OF THE DWBA 

If Vi and Vi are spherically symmetric, the distorted wave Born approx- 
imation can be expressed in terms of the scattering phase shifts 8 t that 
are associated with V x alone. A simple extension of the work of Sees. 
19 and 37 shows that we can express xi« + (r) and xw T ~(i) as follows: 



00 

xia + (r) = C ^ W + lW(r)P*(cos e a ) 

1 = 

-^ C [exp (iK • r) + A/(k,,k«)e«'l 

oo 

xw T -(r) = C ^ (2Z + l)i l Rt(r)P t (cos $„) 
i-o 

-^ C [exp (ft* • r) + ^f-(KM *-*1 (38.8) 

oo 

/(k r ,k a ) = (2*)- 1 ^ (2/ + V(e 2ii ' - l)Pi(cos a ) 

00 

/ r -(k r ,k^) = (2*)- 1 ^ ( 2l + 1)(-1) ! (1 ~ &lt;r*«0P,(cos 0,) 



e 



iii 



Ri(r) &gt; r- sin (At — £Ztt -f Si) 

r— &gt;oo At 

1 A. Sommerfeld, "Wellenmechanik" (Ungar, New York) or "Atombau und Spek- 
trallinien," vol. 2, footnote p. 457 (F. Vieweg &amp; Sohn, Brunswick, Germany, 1939) ; 
G. Breit and H. A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 93, 888 (1954). 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 3» 

Here, k = k a = k p , 6 a is the angle between t and k a , and 0* is the angle 
between r and k„. Note that, forany angle 0, /(0) = f T ~*(r - 0), a rela- 
tion that agrees with the second of Eqs. (37.24) when V is real. 

Substitution from Eqs. (38.8) into the second term of (38.7) gives 

(xie T -,V2 X i a + ) = 4ir|C| 2 £ (2* + l)Pi(cos 0) fj V s (r)Ri*(r)r*dr 

1 = 

(38.9) 

where is the angle between kp and k«, and use has been made of the 
addition theorem for the Legendre polynomials, Eq. (32.10). Equation 
(38.9) is not very convenient for computational purposes, since it is an 
infinite series over I even when Vi is of short range so that only a few of 
the Si are different from zero. This suggests that we subtract V 2 (r)ji 2 (kr) 
from each integrand and add in a compensating series. Since Ri(r) is 
equal to ji(A;r) if S t = 0, this means that {V 2 (r)[Ri 2 (r) - ji 2 (kr)]r 2 dr is 
zero unless 8i is different from zero. Further, the compensating series 
that has been added in can be summed by making use of the formula 1 

oo 

y (21 + l)j,»(ifcr)P,(co8 0) = ^T q = 2k sin }0 (38.10) 

i% qr 

and this leads to the Born approximation amplitude for V 2 alone. 

Combination of Eqs. (37.21), (38.2), (38.7), (38.9), and (38.10) 
leads to the distorted wave Born approximation amplitude for spherically 
symmetric scattering: 2 

/dwba(0) = /i(0) + Ub(6) 

00 

" % I (21 + 1 ) /&gt;J ( C0S *&gt; /o" V *( r X R &lt; 2 W - 3^ k r)V dr (38.11) 
i-o 

Here, /i is the exact scattering amplitude for Vi alone and / 2 b is the 
Born approximation amplitude for V 2 alone. The series represents the 
effect of the plane-wave distortion produced by Vi on the first-order 
scattering caused by V 2 ; the only I values that appear in this series are 
those for which 5j ^ 0. It should be noted that the integrals in (38.9) 
and (38.11) converge only if V 2 falls off more rapidly than 1/r for large 
r, so that special care must be taken if V 2 is an unscreened coulomb 
potential. 

1 G. N. Watson, "Theory of Bessel Functions," 2d ed., p. 366 (Macmillan, New York, 

1945). 

* L. I. Schiff, Progr. Theoret. Phys., Suppl. Extra Number (1965) 400. 



330 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

APPROXIMATE EXPRESSION FOR THE PHASE SHIFTS 

We now return to the case in which the potential is not divided into two 
parts. If V is spherically symmetric, we may substitute the expansions 

X« + (r) = C J (21 + l)iWR t (r)Pi(cos a ) 

1=0 

Mr) = C J (21 + l)i l j l (kr)P l (cos d fi ) 

1 = 

into (37.21), where Q a is the angle between r and k„, and 6p is the angle 
between r and kp. We thus obtain the following as an exact expression 
for the scattering amplitude: 

/(*) = - fl J ( 2l + l)^(cos 0) jj F(r)fl,(r)i,(fcr)r» dr (38.12) 

7 —A 



1 = 



Comparison of Eqs. (19.11) and (38.12) shows that the phase shifts are 
given by 

e*&gt; sin ht = --fir J V^R^jiikr)^ dr (38.13) 

An approximate expression for S h valid to first order in V, can be obtained 
by replacing the whole left side of (38.13) by «,, and R t (r) by ji(kr) in the 
integrand on the right side. This is the Born approximation for the 
phase shift: 

hi = - —JJ V(r)j,*(kr)r* dr (38.14) 

It may happen that the first few phase shifts are large enough so 
that (38.14) is not a good approximation and the remaining d t are small 
but not negligible. In this case Eq. (19.11) can be written 

/(*) - /*(*) + 2^. 2 (21 + 1)(eM ' " 1 ~ ^bi)Pe(co8 6) (38.15) 

1 = 

where use has been made of Eqs. (38.2), (38.10), and (38.14). Each 
term in the summation on the right side of (38.15) is zero through first 
order in V or 8 h so that only the first few terms fail to vanish in the 
present case. 

SCATTERER WITH INTERNAL DEGREES OF FREEDOM 

We shall now extend the T matrix formalism to the case in which the 
scatterer has internal degrees of freedom, so that it can be excited during 
the scattering process. For example, an electron may be scattered by 
an atom that is initially in its ground state; after the collision, the atom 
may be left in its ground state (elastic scattering) or in an excited state 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 331 

(inelastic scattering). However, in either case, the total energy of the 
electron and atom is conserved so that we are dealing with a stationary 
situation. We leave out of consideration the possibility that the incident 
electron changes places with the atomic electron; such exchange collisions 
will be discussed in Chap. 10. 

We divide the total hamiltonian into a part H that describes the 
internal motion of the scatterer together with the kinetic energy of the 
relative motion of incident particle and scatterer, and a part H' that 
represents the interaction between the two. For example, in the scatter- 
ing of an electron (coordinate ri) by a hydrogen atom (atomic-electron 
coordinate t 2 ), we have 

H = Ho + H' 

Ho = _ *! Vl » - — V 2 2 - - H' = — - - (38.16) 

The distinction between the reduced mass /x of the electron-atom system 
and the electron mass m is unimportant here but could be significant 
in a nuclear collision. 

The eigenfunctions of H are specified by two parameters : 

HoUaa — E aa U a a 

■h 2 k 2 
w«a(ri,r2) = C exp (ika • rO Wafa) E aa = /ko ao = —^- + e a 

(38.17) 

where w a and e« are a typical eigenfunction and eigenvalue of the hamil- 
tonian of the scatterer. The corresponding eigenfunction of H that 
corresponds to outgoing waves has the asymptotic form 

x«o + (ri,r 2 ) » C lexp (ik a ■ Ti)w a (r 2 ) 

T\— » 00 L 

+ J n-^e^fiKfi ;K,a)w b (T 2 ) ] (38. 18) 

6 

Here k r is a vector whose direction is that of n and whose magnitude is 
given by the energy conservation relation (h 2 k r 2 /2n) + e&amp; = E aa . The 
amplitude / with b = a describes elastic scattering, and those with b j* a 
describe inelastic scattering. 

ELASTIC AND INELASTIC CROSS SECTIONS 

The wave function x«&lt;. + satisfies a Lippmann-Sch winger equation which 
is an obvious generalization of (37.13) : 

X«a + (ri,r2) = u aa (r[,r' 2 ) 

+ ft- 1 //G ! S M ,.(ri,r;?i,r,)H , (ri,r,)x«. + (ri,r,) d*n d*r 2 (38.19) 



332 QUANTUM MECHANICS 

The propagator associated with H may be obtained by generalizing the 
second of Eqs. (37.8) and making use of the analysis that leads to (37.19) : 

= S 6 w&amp;(r 2 X(r 2 ) ^ J (fa 2 - V + it)- 1 exp [A* • (r[ - n)] d 3 fa 
= ~2^h ^ bWb ^ w *( T M ~ ri l _1 ex P ( ik &gt;&gt;\ T i ~ r iD (38.20) 

where k b has been obtained from energy conservation. 

It is now a simple matter to extend the derivation of Eq. (37.21) 
to the present situation. Substitution of (38.20) into (38.19) and com- 
parison of its asymptotic form with (38.18) lead to 

f(kr,b-ka,a) = -2^//e- i *' r ' C089 '&lt;(r2)^ / (ri,r 2 )xaa + (r 1 ,r 2 )rf3 rid 3 r2 

where 6' is the angle between k r or ri and r x . We now define a vector 
kp, which has magnitude fa and the direction of r[, to give 

/(k /J ,6;k Bl o) = - £. . 2 (pb\T\aa) 

ZirU |C| (38.21) 

0b\T\aa) = fj &lt;(r 1 ,r 2 )H'(r 1 ,r 2 ) Xao + (r 1 ,r 2 ) d*r x #r t 

Equations (38.21) are an obvious generalization of (37.21); further 
generalization to scatterers with several internal coordinates can easily 
be made. 

The elastic differential cross section is obtained from the asymptotic 
form of Xaa + as in Sec. 18 and is equal to the square of the magnitude of 
the amplitude / for which b = a: 

a(k0,aik a ,a) = |/(k„,a;k a ,a)| 2 (38.22) 

In calculating the inelastic cross section, however, account must be taken 
of the fact that the incident flux is proportional to the relative initial 
speed v a = hk a /n while the scattered flux is proportional to v p . We thus 
obtain the same multiplying factor v fi /v a that appeared in the derivation 
of Eq. (37.5). Thus the inelastic differential cross section is 

*(k*,&amp;;k.,a) = ?|/fr &gt; &amp;;k. l a)|» (38.23) 



APPROXIMATION METHODS IN COLLISION THEORY 333 

ELECTRON SCATTERING FROM HYDROGEN 

Equations (38.22) and (38.23) provide an exact description of electron- 
atom scattering, except for the neglect of exchange between the incident 
and atomic electrons, which is discussed in Sec. 43. As before, the Born 
approximation is obtained by replacing x«a + in the T matrix element 
(38.21) by u aa . The resulting integrals are not difficult to evaluate in 
the case of hydrogen. 

Equations (38.16) and (38.17) give for the Born matrix element 

ff U%(Ti,Ti)H'(Ti,Tt)Uaa(Tl,U) d*T X dh 2 

= |C[ 2 e 2 fj exp (tq • r x ) Q- - £\ u£(r»)w B (r s ) d 3 r, d 3 r 2 (38.24) 

It is convenient to evaluate the r x integration first and, moreover, to 
integrate the l/ri 2 and 1/n parts separately. However, it must be 
recognized that these separate parts are not strictly convergent, since 
for large n (that is, for r x » r 2 ), the behavior of the first integrand is like 
that of the second, which gives 

r «xp(*q-rO dV , 4r r-^ d (38 25) 

J ri g Jo 

Because of the similar behavior for large r x , the difference between the 
two parts falls off like 1/ri 2 rather than like 1/ri, so that, when both are 
taken together, there is in effect an extra power of r x in the denominator 
of the integrand of (38.25), and the integral converges. The convenience 
of integrating the two parts separately can be retained by introducing 
an integrating factor e -ar &gt; into the integrand of (38.24) and subsequently 
taking the limit a — » : 

r expftq.rO = ^ 4r r - ^ = 4x } 

J ri „-»o q yo q 2 

With this preamble, we now write the I/V12 part of the n integration 
in (38.24) as 



r exp (tq • ri) ,, ,. . r exp (tq • o) ,, 

J ru J p 



-4 exp (iq • r 2 ) 



where we have put q = ri — r 2 and made use of (38.26). The Born 
matrix element (38.24) then becomes 

4T|C 2 |2g2 / [exp (»q • r 2 ) - lK(r a )u&gt;.(r,) d*r 2 (38.27) 



33.4 



QUANTUM MECHANICS 



The id's are the hydrogen-atom wave functions given in Eqs. (16.24) and 

have a simple enough structure so that the r 2 integration is elementary. 

For elastic scattering from the ground state the Born amplitude is 

h{d) = -!oKi+fcV)-»-i] 

n 9 (38.28) 

q = 2k a sin £0 k# = k a 

Comparison of Eqs. (38.3) and (38.28) shows that the screened coulomb 
potential used at the beginning of this section does not provide a very 
good model for hydrogen, although it is better for heavier atoms. 

Similar results may be obtained for inelastic scattering. For the 
transition from the IS ground state (n = 1, I = m = 0) to the 2S first 
excited state (n = 2, I = m = 0), the second term in the integrand of 
(38.27) is zero because of the orthogonality of the initial and final atomic 
wave functions, and the amplitude is 

Jb{0) = — (gW + 1) 3 

n (38.29) 



: k a 2 + kp 2 — 2k a kp cos kp 2 = k a 



2 _i 



4a„ 2 



In the high-energy case, for which the Born approximation is best, k a a 
is large compared with unity, kp is nearly equal to k a , and q is approx- 
imately equal to 2k a sin £0. Then (38.29) shows that most of the scat- 
tering occurs for qa &lt; 1, which is equivalent to &lt; l/k a a . Beyond 
this, the differential cross section falls off with increasing angle approx- 
imately as cosec 12 ^0. This is a much more rapid decrease with angle 
than the cosec 4 \B dependence obtained for elastic scattering from (38.28). 
The difference occurs because the nucleus contributes to the elastic scat- 
tering, and the orthogonality of initial and final wave functions means 
that only the much more diffuse electron cloud is effective in the inelastic 
case. 

Total cross sections are more easily obtained by integrating over q 
than over 0. This is accomplished by making use of the second of Eqs. 
(38.29) to replace sin dO by q dq/k a kp. The result for elastic scattering 
in the high-energy case is 7ir/3k a 2 , which is about five times as large as 
the 1S-+2S total cross section, (f) 10 (1287r/5/c a 2 ). Excitation to the 
states that have n = 2, I = 1 (IS—* 2P transitions) is most easily cal- 
culated by choosing the three final states (m = 0, ± 1) with their polar 
axis along the momentum transfer vector q. Then the factors e ±i4, that 
appear in the wave functions for m = + 1 make these matrix elements 
vanish, and only the state with m = is excited. This corresponds 
physically to the inability of the incident electron, whose momentum 
loss is along q, to exert a torque on the atomic electron about this axis. 